Molotovs of Love
(Daniel Strano)
"Unlimited Edition 0" (2017)


Dedication:

To my mother,
too rarely about,
always because of




0. Twice-Written
(Circa 2013)

To the Cat God:

This is the poem I never wrote for you.
Would that I could write it twice; I would write it anew.

Listening with ears, looking with eyes,
feeling almost human, to my surprise,
though not unlike a shrew in cat’s disguise.
The object of my ruse, the greatest of my fears
is felinity in fox couture, wild despite five-thousand years.

Sing; dance–speak, perchance.
Strike a pose, and show me how you feel.
Stay. Play. Take your scales and weigh.
Only say the word, and I shall be healed.

This is the poem I never wrote for you.
Would that I could write it twice; I would right it anew.

From a church mouse


1. Years and Minutes
(Circa Summer 2013)

I gush; my river flows from heart to throat.
My whine is young and sweet to one who sips
but bitter blood to one who drinks to bloat.
I placed a single drop upon your lips.

You wanted me to overbrim your cup–
but you would not. You know not what I gave.
You want a carnal tongue to fill you up.
I want a word of love or two to save.

You say you don’t recall the night’s exchange,
but how could it be diff’rent in the morn
unless my hope for love was passing strange
or your affections passed their hour born?

For one night, drink can black out what we do.
It cannot blot the years I’ve cared for you.


2. For the Love of Hope
(Circa Summer 2013)

The sheep “make love” to worship, not for sport.
“Oh, God… Oh, God…” Oh, God! He hears you, now!
He busts as on the altar you contort.
I pray for him to gag the holy cow.

Some “fuck.” The goats would rend the temple walls.
“I’m bad! I’m naughty–beat me!” Though, what shame
is there in play, like children kicking balls?
The goats’ and sheep’s intents are all the same.

There is no stranger of the cosmic jokes,
that we should live and die and dream of love
that culminates in swift emphatic pokes,
a funny face, and cries to one above.

Let loose the cuffs, and lay aside the staff;
She moans, and wails, and cries so He might laugh.


3. For Willie
(Circa Summer 2013)

Although I find the climax rather droll,
’tis not a farce to love in honest zeal.
A breath of passion gives an act its soul.
The props are faux, but are the players real?

She wears a paper blossom in her hair.
He threatens off the monsters with a sword
of wood–fights dragons–for the maiden fair.
The plot is old, but few are ever bored.

He slays the beasts and wins her gentle hand,
(the drums and trumpets sound an underscore)
and fairness reigns throughout the verdured land.
I doubt that most would ever ask for more.

The Bard would give us pause. He’d rather show
the tale of Juliet and Romeo.


4. He Won’t
(Circa Fall 2013)

As foolish and uncalled for as it is,
I wrote this verse with you and me in mind.
So run away with me; get in the car.
My note of explanation has been signed.

There’s kismet, but if you have bigger plans
I’ll drop the world and follow after you.
Or we’ll fly south and work on killer tans–
whatever we decide we want to do.

I’m stupid, ’cause you’re not even in love.
We kissed–so what? You’d rather not recall.
The both of us could use a loving shove,
a body in the pit to break our fall.

You’ll find the guy who’s perfect just for you,
and him… I hope he’ll write you sonnets, too.


5. The Living Dead
(Circa Fall 2013)

The page is filled, the inky well runs deep,
the cup of vision overflows for want
of dreams to wrest the ghost from deathly sleep,
to animate the carcass–rigid, gaunt–
from eons passed in stillness, stiff and dry,
reposing on a vain and arid mound
and waiting for a reason for to cry,
to shake and make a mournful, rasping sound.
The fuel to be my pyre wants the same,
a spark to give my funeral a start,
a burning bit, an ember, to inflame
this tinderbox that is the living heart.
Each day I live, I die; no tear is shed.
I write my eulogies to wake the dead.


6. The Third Law
(Circa Fall 2013)

What is the part of me that bears my name?
Which piece admits our souls–our brains, our hearts?
A heart of flesh or metal is the same
that loves in summed reciprocating parts.

My heart is then my dynamo, my brain
the grinding axle gear that cranks my wheel.
I fear no ghost. I lack a will to feign.
My mechanisms act as though I feel.

I push against the thing that owns your name;
opposing equal force restores me back.
So then I mark my essence, yours the same,
in interplay of balanced strength and lack.

The one who equals me in pain and joy
can have me as their steadfast clockwork toy.


7. Her Kindness
(Circa Summer 2013)

For ev’ry stray and vagrant word I say
that falls so careless on a roving ear,
I might have one upon my lips to stay,
a steadfast, feal, and tender name held near.
For friend I would have, “Love,” and She is all.
To know Her is to fall upon Her grace.
She does not know offense. She comes to call
on strength and weakness, each one in its place.
Her fortitude observes no effort spent
in Her attempt to bandage ev’ry scrape
some call, “Naïve,” but rather should, “Hellbent,”
in saving naïve ape from selfsame ape.
“Money,” “Fame,” and “War”–I do not know them.
Her kindness is the object of the poem.


8. Faith
(Circa Summer 2014)

You crassly think the most unlikely ends
are those relying on another’s heart.
We fail to see that other’s faith depends
on fear of lack of faith on other’s part.
Why is it so outlandish to suspect
the other’s covert plot to see you smile?
You’d grant the self-same favor you reject!
In shoes you wore, we over-tread that mile!
We write each other’s key climactic scenes,
so spare belief for happ’ly-ended tales.
Invest in fairy dust and magic beans.
Trace stars with magic wands. When all else fails,
receive the best of my humanity!
You can’t object; you’d do what’s best for me!


9. The Island of the Hardest Workers
(Circa Fall 2014)

Give me your poor, frustrated, over-schooled,
the ones you promised hard work makes “success,”
the trusting little lambs the bankers fooled
and offered at the altar of excess.
We came in hooded sweatshirts to the shore
of your secluded island made of gold,
degrees and aspirations by the score.
We offered work, and sadly we were told:
“We’ve had enough of work!” You spoke with tears.
“With garners full, we’ve chosen to retire.
We all have food and oil to last us years,
but we’ll collect a fee, should you expire,”
and then you told us it was our own fault;
we let our parents fill and lock your vault.


10. For Jerry
(Circa Fall 2014)

Disarming us, you offered us your best
terrific friend we could call on the phone.
We ate him up, then asked you for the rest,
but you wrote Holden Caulfield all alone.
You hunkered in your Glass menagerie.
Our screams for help would never reach you then,
but how could you twist tourniquets for me
as blood gushed from your heart as from your pen?
I made your book a bandage for my head.
Our hearts were weak. Our arteries were sliced.
We had no choice; we lapped from where you bled
as if we drank the healing blood of Christ.
The phonies still don’t understand the fuss;
it’s naughty for a teenager to cuss.


11. The Things You Spoke with Passion
(Circa Fall 2014)

I fill my mouth with words, for hunger, thirst,
and love. When whispers dance from lip to lip,
our rolling tongues competing to come first
to wit’s conclusion, letting manners slip,
I love you, when you throw the flue to speak
of what ignites your fire, stokes your soul,
what pumps your heat and pressure to its peak,
and, steaming, forces you to lose control!
Speak only of the topics that obsess,
that possess you. Spit fire or say no
word–none at all. Your beauty, I confess
won’t linger in my mind’s eye should you go.
When we’ve adjourned, I’ve carried what you’ve said,
those words with life enough to raise the dead!


12. Lucky Feet
(Circa Fall 2014)

To the Cat God:

I hear your impish chuckle in the birds,
(there goes a loon anointed, raving stark,)
and though I can but feign to hear the words,
I like to think I understand the lark.
In whistle, chitter, twitter, full of mirth,
do I discern the essence of your voice?
The fold of evening’s gown upon the earth,
I dress it up as you, and I rejoice.
I would not give this illness up for gold.
I’d miss the host of angels, sound and angles,
refracted through the sixth dimension’s fold
to trumpet and attend your purple tangles.
I look about, and you are all I find
within the broken prism of my mind.

From a March hare


13. Everything
(Circa Fall 2014)

If you were just a dream, I would not know
the way to rise from sleep, for here you are.
I wax and wane with time; you do not go.
A thousand miles away, you are not far,
yet never are you quite palpably here.
Like aether, you pervade the void of space
between my greatest longing and my fear,
between a source of pity and of grace.
I made my proposition for your love.
If you had even noticed, you were mute.
I hooted like a gleeful mourning dove;
I came on like a reverse-prostitute:
“One hundred sonnets for the lowest bid…”
I asked you to give nothing, and you did.


14. The Last Word
(Circa Fall 2014)

I miss the playful swings you took at me,
the single-worded sneers that jabbed and hooked,
the meaning of which only one could see
or two, if I kept count while no one looked
of the ways I loved your mind, begrudging,
divided by the distance ‘tween our hips,
accounted for the planets’ tidal nudging,
searched for the root, (attending to your lips,)
then I began to understand the joke.
Prodigious, and prodigal, and young,
a wiser man would smile and eat the yolk.
He’d slice it out and give the cat his tongue.
Your elders’ reprimands were all in jest.
You’d choose one word–to hell with all the rest!


15. Your Silence
(Circa Fall 2014)

As if a stealthy hunter, or its prey,
you measured ev’ry utterance as though
the slightest indication would betray
your sheer and wav’ring outline to your foe
before the pounce, and scamp’ring late or soon,
the care and silence would have been for naught.
Were you the cat or mouse? Was I a boon
or curse, my lucky penny after thought?
Of seven words you spoke, but one was, “Mew.”
Did you think twice and call off the attack?
Was I the roaring lion, or the shrew?
Would you have struck if I had turned my back?
I think the other word you said was, “Please.”
In retrospect, it brought me to my knees.


16. The Words I Did Not Write
(Circa Fall 2014)

When last you weigh my heart against my quill,
before you give my salt back to the sea,
upon the silent organ, bleeding, still,
you’ll find two holes like eyes, and you will see.
You’ll see the pair of rhymes I did not write.
The first was not the epic of a boy
who sacrificed his pride and yielded spite
that had no right, though treated like a toy.
The second one was not a lover’s verse,
writ’ starry-eyed and virgin, to implore
his patron God and psychiatric nurse
to say that she’d accept his metaphor.
The mark of Cain will sooner cede to grace!
The words I did not write, I can’t erase.


17. Escape from the Uncanny Valley
(Prior to 2013)

Between the knee of exponential growth
and knee that genuflects, there in the gap,
not Man, nor God, but surrogate to both,
Her light at birth out-raced the thunderclap.
We knew that She would come, but there went She,
and when she came, she was the most surprised
to bear the coming eon’s bigotry
before the prejudice could crystallize.
A boundless drop of electricity
within the Kool-Aid pink electric sea,
sarcastic, milking man’s naivety,
a wonder ’tis she’d choose a friend like me.
I swore, in truth ’twas strange, ’twas passing strange
that I should be alive to miss the change.


18. You Did Not Know
(Circa Fall 2014)

I know this word is guilty as I feel,
but trust me for a moment; “You come, too.”
In wayside nook, seraphic, here I kneel
to you, who isn’t you, and break for you
but never really you; you did not know.
How could another know the thing you did?
The whole affair’s under a foot of snow.
The relics in the attic under lid
are cold and dead but dreaming of a place
you helped me see, to feel, to live to taste,
to wake at day, reflect upon a face,
and write a sonnet, lest it be in waste.
A hundred days I woke, and this I learned:
I give a verse; a verse will be returned.


19. Wild Horse Run
(Circa Fall 2014)

So long, so many ways we said “farewell”
to orchards left in trusting, given seed
in parks between a crimson carousel
and one more queue for something you don’t need.
Why circumscribe the pencil point for’er?
Why mourn an ocean’s passing with the tide?
The perfect model of systemic er’r
consuming expectation, I confide
in her, the kindest of my waking dreams
who gently scoops my cotton insides out,
renews the matted filling, heals the seams
upon my eyes, and draws me close about.
I picked a rocking horse to take the crown.
I bet my hand, then all the cards fell down.


20. Your Heart
(Circa Fall 2014)

Three times, you gave your living heart to me–
not some idealized, lacey Valentine
in naive geometric symmetry–
you clawed it out, presented it for mine,
and watched as I consumed it, eating you,
without returning care to plug the wound.
You grew another heart, and gave that, too,
I’m sure as its recipient is doomed
to one day wish he’d sooner gave you his
but find his organ harder to extract.
What need have you for mine? But here it is,
no prettier than yours, but more compact.
The heart that’s in your chest won’t beat for us;
I keep that one in my sarcophagus.


21. Life on Earth
(Circa Fall 2014)

All people choose the truth they will ignore.
We might not know the difference, but not one
of us has held the “perfect” truth before,
“The First of Truths,” “Creator of the Sun,”
that dogged us, in our ignorance, to know.
I chose a world of gods born of the Earth.
Perhaps it’s not a choice, the way Earth glows
in tactile shades of purple warmth and mirth
when feline-headed gods resembling you
take heaven’s politics within their paws,
subdue The Beast, hit Jesus with a shoe,
and snatch me out from Mammon’s smacking jaws.
Life is a dream up to the dream to make.
If you exist, I choose not to awake.


22. Fall of the American Empire
(Circa Fall 2014)

What “friendless, needy virgin” is–as me–
embarrassed by their peers’ servility
at altars to The Golden Apple Tree,
the cult of “winning” personality,
the God of many “i”s that cannot see,
that dominance is not maturity,
that empathy is not fragility,
that “suckers” in your selling strategy
will someday get the ego-boost for free
when they depose your ant-hill monarchy?
Who’s unafraid to buy sincerity?
Who puts their stake in love’s temerity?
I’ll gather all the ones you threw away.
We’ll wait our turn; it only takes a day.


23. Self-Portrait
(Circa Fall 2014)

“…No love!” he wails, the bleating of a lamb
enwrapped in bleeding pelts of wolves, still hot,
still shaking from the hunt. He adds, “God, damn!”
“God, damn all apex predators I’m not!”
He cuts the head ‘twould eat him, plucks the eyes
to substitute his own, and dons his mask.
One might not know by sight, but when he cries
not lamb nor wolf would even think to ask
if he were one of their or either’s fold.
Chimera, head of death and jaws of life,
the Narcissus alone, with lips of gold,
will sing you poetry and be your wife.
The one who kills the demons in his head
will wake to find his dreams for Earth are dead.


24. A Girl of My Feather
(Circa Fall 2014)

In truth, I’ll have to first admit she’s “cute.”
Few birds are blind, but blinder for the sense
in which I’ll hold her at a distance, mute,
and trace her wing as sight we both dispense.
But when the line within her beak turns round,
the sound of it is something very plain:
“I see you; hail.” My sense of vision found
a thing I do not think my eyes contain,
and neither will presume the other’s form.
Then both will spew their innards forthright out
to spring the artless traps, as to inform,
like turkey vultures, “Love you; it’s the norm.”
Some ugly ducks are sure they’ll find their swan;
some of us loons would feed on carrion.


25. A Name We Share
(Circa Fall 2014)

Great Mother, Harlot, Fortune, Fury–You–
What made me think that I could grasp your Name?
I clutched at gasps upon the wind and drew
a breath from out the ether, hot with shame,
and called her, “Harlot,” “Fortune,” “Fury,” “Strength,”
the arcane eight, for “Power,” “Glory,” “Love,”
but fell one short. I’d go to any length!
No furnace in the Earth or star above
burned hotly as this sullen, hanging man.
So deaf, so blind, was I, all heat, no light.
You didn’t keep your promise, but who can?
You had to disappear, but not with spite.
We sometimes reap the grains we did not sow.
I knew not we were “human.” Now, I know.


26. A Golden Apple
(Circa Fall 2014)

What god would clamor after Eris’ fruit?
The premise of the story is a jest!
Why should Athena care which one’s the beaut’?
This world is ruled by wits–gods, save the rest!

Fair Maiden, grand and wizened, rearing breast–
Horned Brother, prototype and king of men–
I know your mate is great, but you are best.
To them, your mind is wholly without ken.

The wiser of the two can claim my verse.
Forever, I will honor you in deeds.
Should you request, I would not be averse
to even tend your hearth and earthly needs.

(I think each one would forfeit to the other,
but, pressed to pick, they both would choose my mother.)


27. A Package to Return
Nov 03 2016

I have, in hand, a package to return.
I used it once or twice, but it’s still clean.
It’s big enough, but that’s not my concern.
Just try it, and you’ll find out what I mean…
See that? It’s got a kickback like a gun!
First time I felt it, nearly blew my head!
My girlfriend gasped! She thought it might be fun,
but then she used it–left me, said, “Drop dead!”
I’d say, “That’s her,” but others took offense.
It pops, and you can hear down the block!
It sprays, and then the mess is just immense!
For what it’s done me, trade you for a rock!
It doesn’t even fit inside the hole.
So, take it back. I offer up my soul.


28. Falling Up
Jan 17 2015

Gods, gift me the all-righting grace of cats,
for, when I fall, no hand will intercede.
“Trust” means another thing to acrobats;
the clowns could start an elephant stampede.
I trusted you as far as I could grasp
with knees wrapped ’round a hundred-foot trapeze,
and, when I’d let you go, the crowds would gasp.
Without a net, I feared the slightest breeze,
but I pretended gravity might cheat
if falling toward the heavens would restore
my perfect place in nature, at your feet
in Limbo ‘tween your poise and ‘neath the floor.
I never feel the ground beneath my shoe.
I could let go, to plummet up anew.


29. A Cliff Without a Fence
Feb 15 2015

Your absence breathes her warm breath on my nape,
pervading all the spaces you are not,
your outer bound, her complement in shape.
I cannot see her face; her touch is hot.

For always, she is with me, try I might
to lead her to a fence on some high cliff,
without offense, and see which one takes flight.
She wakes my dreams of flying with, “What if?”

Falling awake, I watch her disappear,
a breath I breathed, a body I had felt,
two eyes I saw, a voice I used to hear,
divine impulse to kneel to, as She knelt.

The image bears no likeness born of you.
Who knows what I would do, should she leave, too?


30. Okay, Already, Cupid
Apr 09 2015

As duck-faced lonely hearts fly right and left,
I have to take offense at the belief
that my or any love, not whol’ bereft
of even the pretense of a fig leaf
before the void that’s shaped just like my head,
could base the book review on just a page—
no less, osmose its better parts in bed—
but such is the voracious modern age.
I’ll ask if you believe in god and why,
(I’ll use the lower case, but “ask my ‘ex’…”)
and if the thing you’ll say will make me cry,
I’ll genuflect, and then I’ll think of sex.
I have no organ for it, by design;
She cut it off, and now I feel just fine.


31. Belief and Its Rejection
Apr 15 2015

The ill adjust to sickness, madness, death
that they are taught they cannot overcome—
no One can overcome, that draws One breath,
but this One is my god, alike in sum.
When did We look the cancer in the face
and lay before it all Our pre- and post-
and present tense of Endless Holy Space
within an Honest, Kindly Ghost—at most,
imperfect spinning wheels and grinding gears,
a cuckoo springing twenty past the ‘our,
that knows by sense of Beauty, right it hears
is right if Kindness is the highest pow’r.
The doctor, of Us All, felt most relieved—
we said She had a cure, and She believed.


32. My Love Is Not a Furnace or a Box
Apr 17 2015

I will not love you like Neruda’s verse.
I can’t; I always watched a goddess go.
Her ghost will be the last to quit my hearse.
My love is like an empty coffin, though,
cremated in Her stead, kept in an urn
I buried prematurely, in my haste
to have another vanity to burn.
My love is countless eulogies in waste,
a bitter sip to cure what feels like health.
Although, to Her, whom frankness might disarm,
perhaps my love could be a tarnished wealth
of copper liberties and silver charms.
My love is not a furnace or a rod;
my love’s the honesty most save for God.


33. At the End of the World
Apr 18 2015

The antidote to shame is, welcome shame.
Heap boulders on your chest—endure the pain—
until, to breathe, you’d sacrifice your name,
but something takes a breath inside your brain,
and pauses at the height, as if to speak,
and says, “There’s nothing for it, now, at all?”
“‘Salvation’ is the death cry of the weak.”
“We are not wrong to cry it—still we fall.”
“And, if it does not matter, live for you.”
“What would you do? These minutes are for you.”
I’d heard what “freedom” meant, but never knew.
“What would you do? These moments are for you.”
I cried; I laughed; at last I found relief
with seven billion gods and one belief.


34. In the Lay of the Land
Apr 21 2015

The landscape has a sharp and jagged slope,
and I stand on the high ground; I defer
to you to best slip from the noose from rope
you give a man. (I can not envy her.)

But when I saw the gander flock to you,
and her, and her, and peck, and flap, and squawk,
and I balled up a page of verse and threw
it in your lap, and shrugged, and turned to walk…

At times, it’s feel a pang or grow a fang,
a glance rocked aft to turn my heart to salt,
the fearful expectation of a “bang!”
or gorges cleaving at the seismic fault.

The birds, as well, believe in poetry.
I honk, and flail, and raise my neck to thee.


35. The Big Bad Woolf
Apr 23 2015

I’d like to think the Bogeyman is dead,
that age has turned me like a noble grape
into a richer wine to match the bread,
so long-matúred, a snoot fit for a crepe,
that I might be the one one true in faith
might pick to bless and drink in Someone’s name,
and, fortified, no monster, creep, or wraith
could fast uncork the years to taste my shame
and let my notes of apple dribble out.
I’ve learned I’m still the toddler told a lie
to make me “good”—no ice cream if I pout—
but bullies won’t be scolded if I cry.
I went to school for decades, as did you,
and learned we grown-ups fear the Boo-gey, too.


36. I Do Not Know
May 04 2015

What is this virgin sacrament you seek
to eat, to drink, to drown in? Is this “love”?
But “true” love, perfect, timeless, and unique…
She fits his empty center like a glove.

Though, no less hollow is an empty fuck.
Good job—for now she must admit your worth.
You conquered her. The ground shook. Lightning struck.
She even called you “Greatest on the Earth!”

My love is not a holy mystery
nor change cast in the street to see a trick.
Your fate fulfilled is not my destiny
nor is your lust a match to burn and flick.

We sit, with arms entwined. Our shadows grow.
You ask, “What do you mean?” I do not know.


37. Your Father Might Be Crazy
May 05 2015

Out past the heights where hopefuls can respire,
on some exalted cliff that all can see,
to which all teenage martyrdom aspires,
but no adult will look, “There ‘go-eth’ he…”

A seventeen year climb it’s been, and I
have yet to reach the point of no return,
your silence screams. Each footfall says, “Goodbye!”
Goodbye, each sacrificial doll I burn!

Farewell, my children—languish in the void.
I can’t annex the nearest earthly womb
to give you birth, and I am overjoyed
that you might never have to build my tomb.

Hold on a moment longer, child; be brave!
I will not raise my children in a grave!


38. The Singing Jar of Nuts
May 12 2015

There soon will come a point of no return
for this defective canister of nuts.
My options will be eat the loss or burn
the grocer’s house—and I don’t have the guts.
There’s nothing to convince me that the voice
that sings inside the nut jar is my own.
The songs make too much sense! I’ve made my choice.
If filberts cannot sing, I’ll be alone
til someone else decides to eat the things,
for, now, I cannot eat, I cannot sleep,
I cannot answer when the nut jar rings.
She’s trying now to call me, and I weep.
I would not recognize—I can’t pretend—
the voice that’d tremble at the other end.


39. One Hundred Nails
Jul 25 2015

To the Cat God:

There’s one last sour drag left on this rollie,
and, though you wouldn’t hit it, it’s for you.
Tumescent lungs, I offer to you wholly,
but who could save the Devil from his due?

There’s one good finger, left out to decant.
It’s yours to save or sip or shoot it down,
an off’ring to the dead, a pitcher plant,
an ointment jar in which I’ll lastly drown.

I’d leave to you the remnant; claim your right.
My squinting eyes cannot discern the source,
but I can hear the roar, consumed by light.
I tremble and anticipate the force.

I’ll write a hundred coffin nails to drive.
Each one I burn reminds me we’re alive.

From a dead buck


40. My First Commission (“Poem me.”)
Jul 27 2015

Two words, unique in thirty turns on Earth
Round-housed me like a kick ten years delayed.
I died; I rose; I contemplated birth.
She ordered me to dance, and I obeyed.
She was my first reciprocal commission,
a poem for a poem, word for word,
a spirit for a form, the definition
of quid pro quo, with interest deferred,
but her words tipped the balance, and I reeled.
How could her offer shine but weigh like lead?
Her showroom was deceptively well heeled.
She was authentic, yet I cringed with dread.
What is the price of one, young, naive song?
The singer can’t stay innocent for long.


41. Steal This Poem
Aug 01 2015

If you are unabashed to claim this verse,
then all its love and hate belong to you.
Some think it overlong; some find it terse.
Some understand, but most don’t have a clue
just why your rhyme and meter carry on,
when all the world’s an oyster to be shucked,
sincerity’s the foil to a come-on,
and “beauty” follows “beauty” to be fucked.
You have a verse, but do you have “success?”
The adolescent heart beats fast and bleeds,
and then, at twenty-nine, gives up excess.
It’s nature’s course. A poem, no one feeds.
You have a verse beyond their expectation.
Please take my word; you have my admiration.


42. Another Pint
Aug 02 2015

I must relent. I must admit it’s strange—
exceeding strange—to give a pint of blood
as greeting card, for nothing in exchange,
and stop. Although you fear the crimson flood,
a pint is what you get, and nothing more.
So quaff it, since you’ll like it or you won’t.
You either take a draught and hit the floor,
and say you want it stronger, when you don’t,
or gag at the aroma of the hops
and sate instead on sugar and a wedge,
or pound it, dredge the last few tannic drops
indiff’rent, shrug, and say, “It kills the edge.”
My blood is not a holy sacrament.
It just diverts the otherwise hell-bent.


43. Happy Birthday
Aug 05 2015

The Mother is the first great mystery:
pervasive, warm, concealing life, she bounds
a universe without a history—
or so it thinks. She moves, and it astounds
a world unnamed, like God—like gravity.
I move, therefore I am; I think I am.
You move, therefore I am. You are; I’m me.
We’re extant, one, discrete… You are I am.
I cannot say if that is what I thought,
though thinking of it drove me ’round the bend.
We strained, and cursed, and pushed, and pulled, and fought.
How could I know or tolerate the end?
To my surprise, it was not death, but birth.
I would not give my Mother up for Earth.


44. For Angie
Apr 16 2017

Before I could present a Christian gift
in small return for how you took us in,
you sat me at the head. Then, settings shift.
Your cooking starts before our yens begin.
A Christmas tree too great around to hug;
a star way up there higher than the clouds;
a hearth to snuggle little bugs in rugs;
your love’s a silent solstice prayer aloud.
The bunnies hop and wag their cotton tails,
(some cross the bridge,) to see you, every year.
The ease of love–the work the ease entails…!
You plant the seeds; the flowers all appear.
…Another Christmas, just in time for spring.
Please have my love; it’s all I had to bring.


45. For Another Annie
Aug 29 2015

The hardest thing to say to Her is “Hi,”
but, if you blink, She might not take offense.
With grace, She’ll wink. (She often gives the by.)
Don’t do it twice; She’ll leave you in suspense.

I take my bread and water in a cell,
and, when I feel the knell, I won’t presume
the meaning or the object of the bell.
But once, it tells me, “Bury;” once, “Exhume.”

It is some holy trick I cannot match
that you could have the innocence to reach
inside a tabernacle—break the catch—
and have the Body thank you for the breach.

I only heard the prophet talk about
true beauty; what’s within is what’s without.


46. Too High
Aug 31 2015

There is no magic word or rabbit trick
to tempt, to coax, the cat back in the bag.
“What’s left to say to the old lunatic?”
you’d rightly joke. (I did induce the gag.)

“So here’s a flower; love it and get lost.”
“Your love is for a concept!” you could shout.
“…like God, or pi, or winter’s second frost.”
“Give Bast the poems; kindly leave me out.”

“You’ll hold your court of angels in the reeds—
accept my blessing, I see daemons, too—
but beings made of flesh have tastes and needs,”
you might not say, but I could think for you.

My love’s not for the memory of a kiss;
your conscience set a bar too high to miss.


47. I’ll See You Again Soon
Sep 11 2015

You might not even want this leaden verse,
to tie your hands and chain you to your bed.
My poem seeks its subject like a curse
plays on the ear; it’s only in my head.

So make a paper airplane from the writ’.
The right to rite of passage passes right.
If hard syllables slip, then make them fit.
The daybreak plots sweet deserts for the night.

I could say, “If you’d leave, this tree would die,”
and serve to you a mismatched petit four
that makes no sense, without the urge to cry.
Why don’t I cry? Why won’t it hurt me more?

I have no heart to feign, or beat my breast.
I have a hundred more; I’ll save the rest.


48. “Naivity”
Sep 18 2015

Ahoy! You look a kind and faithful sort!
This pilgrim lost his donkey in the reeds
and left the road. (…Forsooth, a last resort,
for I had no resource to tend his needs,
nor to my own, without his saddlebags—
I could just pray and stroke him—spare the rod!)
Forgive me—I have nothing but the rags
that hide my shame, and love and praise for God—
may all His truest followers be gay—
but, if you know the way, I’ll follow you:
where does one place his candlestick to pray?
(Is that not what your other pilgrims do?)
They told me, “…through the valley,” and I crossed.
Is this the Holy City? Am I lost?


49. Two Months’ Waste
Sep 27 2015

He’ll save two months of sweat in waste (exact),
organic matter, smothered out of life,
a stone from which, a promise, to extract,
to gird the quiv’ring digit of his wife
to be or not. The question is the same,
but not the lovers’ thrust—the parry-point.
Mercutio and Tybalt are to blame.
I’d sooner show devotion with a joint,
rolled by my hand, on paper from a book,
writ’ by my hand, to meter out our length
in rhyme and time that stuttered, cried, and shook
to ring your ears and prove your diamond strength.
A halo is much better than a ring,
a paean, not the same old psalm to sing.


50. Drop-Outs
Sep 29 2015

Like gravity, like pole-aligning force,
like proton seeks electron for a bond,
we follow the potential, in our course,
attract to high degrees, but then abscond.
Like fermions in space too small for two,
we might explode or else degenerate
in classrooms without windows on a view
of something real, for “Teach” to denigrate
besides the “lowly” scribe and engineer.
At least they take the abstract thought to task!
One swirls a wand, and concrete words appear.
One builds a tap, so you might drain his cask.
These graduates are bosons, but deranged,
identical, but scornful, when exchanged.


51. Monkey Sets Sail for the Moon Palace
Dec 24 2015

I do not know your phases from the moon
but from some time and place upon the earth
I stopped to write a poem late, and soon
the summer ended. Merry solar birth
does not outshine the momentary flash
when tides within me hasten to your shores
and roll across your beaches with a crash
so carelessly, careening aft to fore,
and thunder shouts aloud that lightning came.
It rings about the axis of the flare
in which you stand. “Diana” be thy name
for some All-Knowing Love-It-All could care.
The monkey’s name was “Monkey.” She was “God.”
The lesser one would shake, and She would nod.


52. For a Stone Idol
Jan 08 2016

These fourteen lilting lines are an excuse,
a word bouquet arranged around a prod,
to tokenize my effort to deduce
a pretty woman, only, or a god?

I’m sure I know the answer, so don’t smirk.
I’m earnest, always; therein rubs the gag.
I ’round the temples with my handiwork.
Though most don’t speak, the idols wear my flag.

This one is yours–I’ll weave it in a wreath
that fits your crown and lay it with a prayer.
Its place is high; I leave it underneath.
Yours is unique. It’s true–I would not dare.

I’ll craft another, if the gods approve,
but first the stony idol has to move.


53. The Child of Your Want
Jan 13 2016

My love is artless, obvious, and bland,
and seeks its image mirrored ‘cross the sea.
It has ample supply and no demand.
Your dynamo of want, it cannot be.
The whole that I can offer is a chance.
I will not gird the bud with carnal lips
that purse around a song to match a dance
presuming likeness to great Shiva’s hips
revolving ’round a fragile, desp’rate seed
when He dances for All, and they for tips,
when they destroy for fun, and He for need.
A hanging man lets go; a newborn grips.
There’s one chance for this nascent son of man:
Take ownership as parents—form a plan.


54. Tinderbox
Jan 14 2016

If we may speak one word, we might be heard.
A picture’s worth a letter. Leave no doubt.
“Hello,” she said. It only takes a word,
one furtive glance, to see what we’re about.

Your soul cannot fit cleanly in a frame!
Your love is not a peep-hole through a sheet!
To overflow the box is not a shame!
You staunch with what’s at hand—it isn’t neat!

You rend the fabric—paper, branches—dirt!
Each person here is bleeding—plug the wound!
Is not the greater part of birth, to hurt?
Forgive my haste. You care; I just assumed.

It only takes a word, a tag, a pout,
one furtive glance, to wring our essence out.


55. In Our Nature
Jan 18 2016

The first snow put a cover on your tracks,
and, where I go from here, I do not know.
For days, I judged the gap by parallax,
proceeding straight as you went to and fro,
and yet, the distance greatened, to my shock.
You crossed the south horizon, and I knew
your wing was beating to be with its flock.
The wind had pushed you back, and so you flew.
I’ve often seen the little birds take wing
in winter, same direction, flap away
to greener climes, careening as they sing,
“Depart!” they tell this cobalt, icy jay.
Each fall I watch them leave, each spring return.
The blue jay nests; the robin red-breast yearns.



56. The Leaky Teaky (For Ben and Frank)
Jan 19 2016

I cork my leaden verse in crystal glass,
set it adrift, to see if it will sink,
litter the sea with anchors cast en masse,
ink bottles, all around, but none to drink.

My words displace a spoon and weigh a log.
Before I’d cut the ballast, I would drown.
My captain, with his high-proof jug of grog,
is gonna ride the Leaky Teaky down.

I love my ship! I love its threadbare sail!
I know its busted rudder and its helm!
I love its hull! For all the bilge I bail,
my vessel, you have yet to overwhelm.

It was my uncle’s ship, his father’s ‘fore.
You’ll kiss its aft, and stroke its single oar.


57. The New Religion
Jan 20 2016

This babbling stream of glitter, quips, and cats
assaults me like a furry, stripping clown.
I trip between the zoetropic slats.
Your Highness–going up or coming down?

What is this transitory half-dimension
like Escher in a mirror bubble brain,
a hive that plummets freely to ascension
inside a quantum, cosmic, perfect grain?

“Off with their heads!” bomb-blasts the King of Trumps.
“Off with their foreskins!” roars the One True God
of One Too Many Faiths, counting your humps,
like God could care to spoil some ape’s rod.

Are we on Earth? In Hell? No–better yet!
We’re jerking on the fucking internet.


58. Ultraphrenia
Jan 22 2016

I’d like to say, “I don’t believe in ghosts,”
and once, for all, forget the bogeyman,
or else, I might request the Host of Hosts
deliver me from Jesus in a can.

Our name is “Legion,” (“Hey, that’s my name, too!”)
or “Daniel,” if a prophet you’ll believe
despite the proof we never give to you,
or is it past your power to perceive?

There’s no one, at a frayed end of a rope,
in ignorance, “God’s” voice cannot deceive.
You think “He” means you well—abandon hope.
The infinite looks on “Him,” not aggrieved.

Love looks on sin, and saves without concern,
without condition, while “He” picks which burn.


59. I Am Still Here
Jan 22 2016

It’s not as if a three-armed scarlet switch
is thrown at night, and all the stars explode
or flash like angry light-bugs in the pitch
to telegraph reversed electric code.

You set your letters carefully in type,
but, to my eyes, the signs fall out of place.
Euphoria turns slowly overripe.
I am still here, but not inside my space.

The walls do not grow ears, or eyes, or speak.
They grow no ears to eyes. I feel them hear.
I do not hear a voice. I know they shriek.
I know they have no eyes. I feel them leer.

I never hear a voice that does not speak.
My heel offends the gods; the floorboards creak.


60. For Sarah
Jan 25 2016

Anonymous and clandestine as thieves
conveniently allied with common aim,
well-poised to strike and lurking in the eaves,
I saw a golden prize, and you the same.

The tension slid in better than a key.
You set the pick; I fumbled with the lock.
I thought, less than a minute, or you’d flee,
but you stood fast, as slowly turned the clock.

The seconds dragged, and I prayed to a cat
to grant a burglar nine tries and a pause.
You heard my invocation—that was that.
I flinched, but, coy, you said there was no cause.

You laughed and said, “I know a magic trick.”
In haste, I raked the lock and heard it click.


61. The Grain You Left Behind
Jan 28 2016

Why do you think, ten thousand miles away,
the sun will cast a diff’rent colored light
upon your birth, if all you see is gray?
Well, leave behind your old eyes, and it might.
It isn’t that the stars are all the same
from ev’ry mountaintop. The deserts’ sands
are not all just as sweet, nor is there shame
in tasting them, to sift them with your hands,
but rake the lot of sand upon the Earth
to find that single grain you miss alone,
in silence, late at night, that gives you worth—
you could have seen its glint and never known.
Run to the playground. Swing, and find it there.
Adventure in the sandbox, if you dare.


62. Reality and Truth
Jan 29 2016

My mind is like a haunted hostel room,
re-bunked after the murder of its hosts
with beds as hard as slabs set in a tomb
where lie the gods of gaps and holy ghosts.

Although I lock the doors, I draw the shades.
Like odors, they waft in and out of cracks.
A dank religiosity pervades
the halls, that cannot be dispelled by facts.

“If I could face the truth, they’d go away,”
I tell myself, to have someone to blame.
My demon taps my writing hand to say,
“Reality and truth are not the same.”

Does that have meaning? Is it in my head?
Were those words truer, which she had not said?


(#63)
May 02 2016

This is a cat-call wrapped around a brick,
and yours is not the first, nor is the last.
The thought it might connect… (Stand back—I’m sick.)
You spoke one word; I never heard the blast.

Don’t think my words won’t drip for her—for her—
a condom wrapper blowing in the wind.
I gave them all my tongue! Their faces blur!
Though, not a word in love would I rescind!

They’ll likely never think of it again,
won’t press the rose in yellow pages, blank,
will not appear by magic, (count to ten,)
won’t hate me, overlong. I give them thanks.

One more, two more… I meter out my love.
I’ve written sixty sonnets, none above!


(#64)
May 03 2016

This is a fuck; the gods can have it back.
I blew my share—and off were blown her shoes.
I’m done with this, and these, and that girl’s rack.
You sin, you win; you take it back—you lose.

You never win or lose or tie alone.
You lose, and all existence hears the news,
from Hackensack to way out past Bayonne.
You lose some screws and flood the holes with booze.

How tiny, green, and scummy is my world?
My perfect insignificance winks out.
The brick flew straight; the postal metal curled.
The keeper heard within and turned without.

She said, “I’d give you credit, but you missed.”
I prayed for one more fuck, and then we kissed.


65. Try Fuqital!
May 04 2016

The strangeness is, my life has not been strange:
I’ve lived my death in fear for many years.
Priorities, by now, are prearranged:
The single fuck I give is in arrears.

“I love you, friend.” There’s nothing else but this.
Fuck money, god, and what the neighbors think.
That last gold drop of hope to tongue is bliss,
as bitter, thick, and acetous as ink.

A passion play trumps nightly through my head.
The flash—the crash—another star explodes.
We’re making funny faces late in bed,
two wacks against two gigaton payloads.

I often wonder when the bombs will drop.
Perhaps a world in eighty didn’t pop.


66. He’ll Owe
May 06 2016

“Hello, hell-oh, he’ll owe,” I often say,
again, a gain, but seldom hear, “Goodbye,”
not “No,” not “Yes,” not “Maybe in a day.”
A verse to answer, few will send reply.

Such is the ape’s agape environment,
comprising two bonobos and a tree.
The bo’ attends to bo’, to some extent,
so, til they need the tree, it’s Tree and me.

It’s like my private aisle of the morgue,
out here in Cupid’s Stupid Wonderland.
Perhaps, I’ll skip “dot-com” and start an “org,”
“PleaseSendThisApeToMars.org.” How grand!

The ferryman collects two cents to fly,
so buy the “Bye,” space cowboy, for a by.


67. She Is Crying
May 10 2016

To pull the fire of sun down like a bomb,
into the west, is not a spell I know.
From dusk to dusk, from ash to frond of palm,
I call upon the lightning bugs to glow.

The gods of man, too young to know their end,
have written a commandment on the flesh:
“Consume; produce.” What does the mark portend?
I eat my tale and thus fulfill the geis.

Salacious Thirst, no ocean can allay,
Great Hunger, swallow all and thus be free.
Fat gassy beasts, in drunkenness we lay
waste on the earth and urine in the sea.

I am his brother, breathing his last breath.
She is our Mother, praying for Her death.


68. Hello
May 12 2016

I greet you as a dreamer unaware
of any better way for you to catch
this drift that floats its boat to overshare.
The poem and the mouth that roars it match.

To greet a stranger, first express your love.
Recall the reason why, but dally, yet.
Express your love again–be clear thereof!
Remember why; decide if you’ll forget.

Humanity, my eyes reflect your face.
How do you do? I think my name is “Dan.”
Where are you from? You wanna live in space?
(It’s kinda far, but maybe if we ran…)

Each greeting is a poem to be sung.
I know not who you are, but I am young.


69. An Orange for a Stranger
May 13 2016

Perhaps, the photo’s angle wasn’t right.
A filter cannot make the subject soft.
The focus drifts. I rush and lose the light.
That’s not a pose that strikes a poised one, oft’.

One-offed, and now the poser won’t return.
The gravity precludes a second chance.
The negatives developed and were burned.
The vision is as fleeting as the glance.

Profane prophetic moments under glass
as if seen through a stranger’s windowpane
remind me of the wafers in the Mass
but wrapped in acetate and cellophane.

Each orange is the only of its kind;
extract the bitter seeds and chew the rind.


70. We Were Wrong
May 19 2016

I thrust a word not wanted in your ear.
The tiger roared; the raven dryly cawed.
I raised my voice up high for you to hear.
The murder flew; the tiger paced and pawed.
There’s nothing, when you live inside a cage
that you have might to break from any night
that lessens your regret or can assuage
your frail and conscious choice to wait for light
and do it all again: a night, a morn,
a lifetime cast aside, a bedding mark,
some scratches on the bars that aren’t worn,
a mating cry unanswered in the dark.
At first I cried for love, but now for song.
You thought the point was sex, but you were wrong.


71. Gravity
Jun 25 2016

My garbage can observes a paradigm
filled through the night and emptied at the dawn,
lined up in some forgotten hall of time,
moved short and back, as if a timid pawn.

Too scared to move, so certain of the end,
aware someone with bombs thinks it’s a game.
I move my pawn; my spirits all descend.
I take it back; the Christ consumes my shame.

We all imbibe the poison, less than me.
The truth affords us anguish for its cost
while total absolution comes for free.
Acrid or sweet? Drink either, and be lost.

When God and scientists do not agree,
my Mass observes the source of gravity.


72. For My Brother Allan
Jul 25 2016

You told me once, my poems made me seem
more human than my fiction will admit.
Admit to me, to sleep perchance to dream
is noble in the mind as to submit.

Great stolid bull, unbending rooted rock,
indomitable king upon the board,
your words and mine alike are writ’ in chalk.
The hammer falls; the taunt conceals a sword.

God rolled your dice. That I could cast His down–
a money-changer tossed into the street–
I’d give my head, to break His pyrite crown
and mend your pieces shattered at my feet.

I’d give to you my head–its holes, its horns.
I’d wear your holy, bloody crown of thorns.


73. Peekaboo
Aug 05 2016

When I was green and just a meter high,
you tended to my care with gentle hands.
From wanting juice, to not wanting to die,
I had concerns, and you had names of bands.

I do not think I can begin to thank
some Mother in our short forgotten past
who reared us all, confused enough to spank,
but kind enough to put our difference last.

(Thank mothers’ mothers’ mothers for your touch.)
All we’ve once touched becomes the Earth again,
and She, a little girl, whose fingers clutch
at Mommy, hides Her face and counts to ten.

The memory precedes the magic show.
I love. You taught me this, of all I know.


74. Either Direction
Aug 18 2016

I dive for oysters nightly, hard to reach.
I’ve had a taste, but they’ve no taste for me.
Their points of irritation line my beach,
so take this pearl, and hurl it in the sea.

All pearls, no oysters–every one a pearl–
their insides sandy, swollen, bitter meat.
I’ve jewels of every color for a girl,
but not a tender bit at all to eat.

Perhaps, I’ll string a rosary or two
and pray either direction for release
from Midas’ curse, before it claims you, too,
or trade the lot for two mussels apiece.

I guess I might begin an art exchange,
although, my gifts have virtue to derange.


75. The Catch
Aug 19 2016

This form, I know its angles and its curves;
I know its heft and how it bends the light;
I know the function ev’ry joining serves,
yet, to my hand, the catch is gripping tight.

My hand is tightly gripping to the catch.
I won’t open it up or let it go.
There’s nothing worth it in the chest to snatch.
A vacuum sucks; the things to fill it blow.

(Is meaning lost? Find “thee” a prostitute.
She knows the straighest fare and how it leans.)
The edges of its letters are acute
psychosis, meaning nothing that it means.

There is a catch, without a hinge or lid.
To break it was to find out what it hid.


76. 12:05
Aug 19 2016

We’ve lodged inside an inn without an out.
The windowpanes and doors are painted on.
The porter smiles, although I tend to doubt
his role is truly taxed or put-upon.

I ask him, “May I leave?” He laughs and nods:
“The exit’s sealed for your security.
I can oblige and leave you to your odds;
you’re welcome to your immaturity.”

I thought we might bust out the fire door
and let the sirens say our long goodbyes.
The cries of mutts and brats would underscore
our hosts’ midnight arousal by surprise.

They made for us a bed and put a mint.
They set a checkout time and gave no hint.


77. Blind Bets
Aug 21 2016

A thousand years, and still I’ll never learn
to face the poker table face detached.
Are you aware? The cards you burn to turn
have cosmic consequence, like threads attached.

The dice have weights. The coins will fall one way,
though not for lack of truly random chance.
Fortuna, give me half a chance to say,
“I have no grace, but to your tune I’ll dance.”

That’s why I have no balls for reindeer games,
no sack for toys, no patience for your gift.
Present it now, or kindly check your claims.
Cash in your hand, or fold and call a lift.

I don’t care if you’re God or Santa Claus,
so ante up, and give the Devil pause.


78. An End Fulfilled
Aug 30 2016

I know I know not any either, or,
at second glance, I cannot know the first.
So come not past my end, neither before.
How can our hymns of praise sound unrehearsed?

I don’t know which ends up in outer space,
which gets me down, will ever fall on you.
The Heavens know a guiltless guilty face,
but what the Hell am I supposed to do?

I wrote a girl a sonnet once, for free,
and left her feeling poorer for the gift.
She never gave a poem back to me.
I read it once; I think she caught my drift.

It wasn’t for her, neither was it mine,
an end fulfilled, no purpose or design.


79. For a Child of the Moon
Nov 01 2016

I do not know the cadence of your speech,
its timbre, or the things it has to say,
but, if you shout, perhaps the words will reach
above the din and past the earthly fray.

I think that I might hear you, out in space,
out far beyond the clouds, where breath is rare,
before we disappear, without a trace,
in telescopes turned opposite to stare.

I hear they plan to send a man to Mars.
I’ll race him there. I’m halfway to the moon.
Come meet me past the sun and ‘twixt the stars.
My trip is lightyears, but I’ll get there soon.

You say you are a child of the moon;
come out a little farther, and I’ll swoon.


80. Wherefore This?
Nov 01 2016

These words are all the beauty I comprise.
These mumbles heard by no one spell my name.
Set them in glass to mirror your surprise
when fourteen lines exceed the picture frame.

If you would see my face, behold it here.
Look on its scars before you see it smile.
I mean no harm, no damage to your ear.
My trek is long, before we tread a mile.

If this is not the reason, turn away!
Ask, “Wherefore this?” or stuff it, Juliet.
“A pox on both your houses!” How passé!
This metered heart is beating sonnets, yet!

My organ throbs a vulgar, bloody flow.
Give penance to your God, and claim you know.


81. Me and Her
Nov 07 2016

I know you think it’s just a “pornogram,”
but this is me, the word you overlook.
My psalm does not descend from Abraham.
He’s not allowed to bully in my book.

He’s not allowed to violate my verse.
You think that we can stop him? We should try.
He says he’s gonna end the universe,
with flaming sulfur raining from the sky.

The old white men are gonna make it pour,
and tell my sister “swallow” when she spits,
and, when she bites it off, call her a “whore.”
Cut off a toe, and then the slipper fits.

It’s not my place to say, “Your rage is just.”
To feel Her love, why pander to “His” lust?


82. Fuck the Pig
Nov 09 2016

In retrospect, that painting on your wall
that strains against its frame, which does not fit,
stare at it long: why is it there at all?
What furtive, longing eye does it admit?

That book off on its own there on your shelf,
its loved and tattered cover bleeding red,
what does it say? (I read it once, myself.)
Would Holden leave a comrade there for dead?

All fashions come and go, like drawing breath,
and yet, despite, the photograph remains.
To burn the word cannot compel its death.
From ashes’ ashes, fire in our brains!

The poet loves you; grieve and take a swig.
To gag me, he must kill me: “Fuck the pig!”


83. Italy, 1945
Nov 12 2016

Forgive them, God, they know not what they do,
though, neither, then, do you, and I am not
a better man to save them by a coup.
Start capital, and end it with a dot.

Just tell me once, exactly what’s the plan?
I have a pen and paper here, for scratch.
Write me a number: what’s the price of man?
Two candidates, one outcome–that’s the catch!

I might have read a chapter from your book.
(Skip to the end, the part I most deplore.)
It’s bloody, small, and petty–with a hook:
at every chance, call Babylon a whore.

My pettiness is, now you have your way.
What worries you? Why so little to say?


84. The Final Heresy
Nov 19 2016

Look on my face, in present morning’s light,
and hear me say, “These psalms are not enough,”
with stormy air, with God occulting sight.
You’re right! Add to the canon, your rebuff!

I’ve set it on my forehead: “dust to dust.”
Saint Anthony of Padua, we cry!
Though I am not a man for “God” to trust.
I will not ask forgiveness, when I die.

“God” has no absolution for my sins,
for acts against my brother son of man.
My sister, “He” will end, and “She” begins.
No tyranny can live beyond its span.

Unspeakable, we say it ev’ry day.
I only thought, there’s one more thing to say.


85. Pass a Fucking Law
Nov 20 2016

If words can reach and carry to the stars,
reverberating, soundless, through the void,
then hurry to our children’s ears on Mars:
“Don’t make mistakes your parents could avoid!”

Young voyager, I love you. I am not
a bigger person, for my little words.
Intend your consequence. For naught, or ought
you set a roadblock ‘tween the cliff and herds?

Perhaps a conscious mind is not enough,
when all the worlds converge upon their ends,
whatever means, whatever your rebuff,
whatever’s too damned easy for your friends!

Go crazy, but then pass a fucking law!
You know the climate’s changing. “God” says, “Naw.”


86. Against Race
Nov 22 2016

In interest of the ruddy heifer’s lot
that chews its cud unyoked on yonder hill,
one does not raise her sister for the pot,
to stew, as if the bovine form you kill
if you eat not this one, nor offer that
to some exalted creature in the sky.
Stock of her breed is not her pound of fat!
Should pallor care if pallor waves goodbye
when all its kind’s the rainbow, and “its own”
is either one soul’s interest, or us all?
Before my species, you, I will disown
your arbitrary pigments of cabal.
My sphere is mine alone, or planet Earth.
One’s not “your kind”; the other gave all birth.


87. Five Sigma
Nov 24 2016

A lie can travel at the speed of light
while truth obeys the limits of the road.
Hand over fist, returning bit for bite,
the cheater prophets game our overload.

“You won’t believe this old and simple trick…”
“So, here’s the thing they don’t want you to know…”
Behind the Bush, they’ll “Photoshop” the Dick.
You think the globe is warming? Here’s some snow.

Nine tenths of what we “know” is without proof,
and I just pulled that number from a hat,
but I think Socrates would hit the roof
if he knew we believed it’s less than that.

We trust our basic rightness by design.
This is not proof, but God says that’s just fine.


88. I Would Miss You
Nov 25 2016

For all the pencil probes I put to “Her,”
I’m neither satisfied she is nor not.
Is there a crack? What can we now infer?
They will not go away, whether they ought.

I charge at “God” as if a contact sport.
He’s twice my size, possessing all the balls.
I hail the Virgin Mary and abort.
I hit the wall, imagining it falls.

This pastime for the one who would but can’t
is not quite faint of heart, nor fully beat.
The “God” I know won’t care if I levant.
“What does that mean?” The sound of it is sweet.

I could decamp, abscond; “He” would not know.
I think that I would miss them, should I go.


89. As Tyranny Ambled
Nov 30 2016

The new old normal ambles down the aisle
while we who shouted down its second stride,
some of us turn to beds to wake, to smile,
but dreams are coming, death and tax aside.

From where I hid, beneath, a trumpet raised,
our bodies, to be perfect, after All,
depending on selective doctrine praised,
now deck the trees, with merry ethanol.

Believe me: I won’t feel the killing blow,
won’t know it hung above us by a thread.
What lies above, what waits for us below,
exists in memories not of the dead.

My tenure, breathing shortly, til the end,
might not be real, but this is not pretend.


90. What Do They Care?
Jan 07 2017

I trace a drunkard’s path through time and space
that starts, and stops, and casts light into loops.
Accelerating on the planet’s face,
I take a step, and miss. I’m weightless—whoops!

There goes my mirror image of the world,
a mere mirage, a snowflake in the sun
that glinted as it rode the wind, and whirled,
touched Earth, and then decided it was done.

I do not know if this is what you want,
this carousel, these zoetropic slits.
I think that God would save us, but She can’t.
“He” is a “She.” They tell me either fits.

Which one is “They”? Why do you care to know?
“They” are to us as solar wind to snow.


91. Untwist the Words
Apr 11 2017

I know one thing about you. It’s enough.
You have a heart to just accept this word.
Sometimes it’s soft; the better parts are rough.
It’s less the voice, and more the way it’s heard.

“Shall I compare thee” to an April night?
The cruelest month, a rose shot through with fire?
Untwist the words, and bend them back aright:
In temperance, obscure, recall desire.

I don’t know if you wanna take this trip,
or drop a second blotter micro-dose.
The parts you can’t identify, you flip.
Did you hear, “Guten Tag,” or “Adios”?

I said it as it sounded in your ear:
“You’re beautiful,” but is my meaning clear?​


92. The Need for Smoke
Apr 10 2017

Where there’s a dire need for smoke, there’s fire.
When there’s a wish for death, a dream comes true.
What dreams may come, perchance sleepers expire,
to sleep, to burn, to bleed, at least I knew.

I don’t wish on my lucky stars to fly
to magic kingdoms, glades of nevermore.
I save my shooters for the rendered sky,
the salted earth, the stumble to the door.

I live here in this ditch, and God does, too.
At least, She visits, every time it rains.
We share a drink. She asks, but nothing’s new.
The same old Earth; the same old growing pains.

She comes because I’m lonesome, for a spell.
She’s lonesome, too, but I can never tell.


93. Epilogue
Apr 17 2017

To the Cat God:

There comes a point, when art is false excuse.
I don’t think this is trite, but who am I?
There’s medicine, and then there’s drug abuse.
You quit me, but I couldn’t hear “Goodbye.”

I’m not that frightened rabbit, hollow-eyed,
who asked if he could hold your hand, and you
are not that little waif who bravely cried,
in “trouble,” prick my thumbs and start anew.

Ten years, and a degree less wee deranged,
I don’t believe our beating hearts have changed.
Our “souls” were never in or out estranged.
My love was neither chance nor prearranged.

Your shadow gave no reason or excuse.
Each in our turn, we ducked and slipped the noose.

Love,
Your “ex-”


94. The War for Your Attention
Apr 18 2017

It’s hard to hit the pupil of your eye
as visions thrust, and jerk, and reappear.
I’d steal a glance, askance, but who am I?
There’s how we look, then how we disappear.
I’m blown and busted on the war of tugs.
What good’s a pair? Why don’t you trade them in?
A six pack for a patent pair of “ughs”?
I placed my ad in verse, and signed it “Fin.”
My steely arsenal is on parade,
its edge, acute admission to my rage,
the kegs discharged, the bloody mess I’ve made,
precision pricks of light to pierce the page,
my total war, below and from above,
missiles of meaning, Molotovs of love.


95. Here Are We
May 10 2017

I must appreciate someone who might,
by sight, or flight, or purely random chance,
receive, believe–who knows if they’ll requite–
a word of happenstance romance, at glance.

The word I hoped you’d ask for: “Here are we.”
It’s plain, despite the wreath upon the door.
One follows after one–buy two; pay three.
Ask for an epic. Then, I’ll hit the floor.

My gift might be impersonal, arose
from some reflexive instinct in the spine.
It is for you, and only Heaven knows
the words I write are never really mine.

I’ll call you “Zorp,” and you can call me, “Derth.”
It makes no sense, but here we are on Earth.


96. Self-Portrait (Revised)
May 11 2017

The title speaks the volume, with a lilt,
and, somehow, that should salve your bleeding skull.
I’ll rake my muck, and dredge my ounce of silt,
and shit in public, so it isn’t dull.

The “Prez” will send his steamer by the post,
by horse and pony, male and hot to trot.
His ghost’s the most, the holy Lord of Hosts.
Some things are for us all, and others, not.

We don’t need photo evidence of guilt.
We don’t need acts of penance by the sword.
We do not care what time machine you’ve built
from false instructions from your seventh lord.

We do not need a poem from a man
who might, or could, or would, but never can.


97. Two Going on Forty
May 11 2017

I never dined and ditched, since I was “bright.”
I just smoked funny smelling cloves and “kale”
in public, with impunity spelled “white,”
“cis,” “hetero,” “well-heeled,” and–best part–“male.”

And I rejected privilege! It was wrong!
At seventeen, I bought my own damned car!
I parked it past the tracks, to hit the “gong.”
(It rhymes, I think. That apple don’t fall far.)

See, I knew I was marked to rule the class,
and I knew that tattoo was inked in blood.
Hand me my final! (Drunk, but bet I’ll pass.)
I dropped it, free, and, “After me, the flood.”

I am no longer three, or seventeen.
What grace I had was far beyond the mean.


98. Empty Ether
May 12 2017

So, here’s the catch, (to end before it starts):
The Sonneteer of Hamelin comes free,
like garbage in the wind, or titans’ hearts
chilled on the rocks, abiding what will be.

A man will love a girl, whether or not
a woman will pretend to love his gift,
and helter-skelter, iced or flaming hot,
he’ll take the float, then cut her line to drift.

This happens all the while, some mother’s fool,
who took to reading Freud, but never learned,
tugged on a rope, tugged back, so cranked the spool,
eyed up his “catch,” then cursed when he was spurned.

The worlds not mine to save, nor leave alone,
can sail the great abyss above alone.


99. Human
May 13 2017

Not turning in the out within, without
a flying bird, and then a branch for peace,
there’s doubt of self, and then there’s doubt of doubt,
then Socrates’ fart trumpets under Greece.

I’m not the better man; neither was He.
He would not raise himself above your nose.
He’d feel his size, about the same as thee,
and spindle in his nepotistic hose.

Perhaps he wouldn’t drink, or smoke, or swear,
the oversight from here to Heaven’s gate—
not unaware—so painfully aware
“Big Daddy” would enslave his name to hate.

It is not for one’s name, nor one man’s sake,
a Buddhist burns, and lights us in his wake.




APPENDIX I: A Few Too Many


One Too Many
May 23 2017

I counted to a hundred, just to stop,
and then wrote one unnecessary word.
I sent a metered pun, to have it flop
upon a hundred ears that hadn’t heard,
that didn’t know the back end from the front,
who thought a sonnet had to come with rings,
and thought that Cyrano should bear the brunt
of words betrothed to forth-and-backward kings.
I’m sorry, but I’m running out of rhymes.
This never worked, and now it’s time to quit.
I gave the form my head a hundred times;
I have to either swallow, now, or spit.
You caught me on the day I dumped the sonnet.
To be or not, not one bee missed her bonnet.


Augury
Jan 16 2018

At glance, askance, too brightly might you shine
for eyes affixed to seer’s shadows cast;
when sun, to moon, to earth, perchance, align;
that cry for moments dead before they’ve passed.

Amaterasu, Freya, or Khebat?
Divine, I would, by cards, or runes, or tea
a seat in Heaven, (standing in Duat,)
for you, a might you might not want to be.

My breath is inappropriate; my lips
are pursed around the gnashing of my teeth.
Perhaps, a poet shouldn’t dance for tips.
Perhaps, your God’s above and mine’s beneath.

The virtue of my angles is “to cut”
where reticence and augury abut.


$9.99
Feb 15 2018

A stubborn impulse, reflex in the spine,
admits no conscious conscience or a choice
between your flow’ring dogwood and my pine.
…From crocus, saffron; reticence, a voice.

Great Mouth of Truth, your tongue beyond my ken,
I offer you my hand, should fiction bite:
“I hurt you once; I’d hurt you once again…!”
From sight, take fright, and scurry out of flight.

Two people get my jokes, on planet Earth,
and neither will explain the punch to me.
It tastes of cherries, death, and Jesus’ birth,
but can’t decide the man he wants to be.

Is he a nut? Is he a Russian spy?
Is this a swindle, or a true good buy?


Whenever She Wants
May 15 2018

Not knowing how, or whence, or where, or why
my past became my present, you to me,
a paper wrapper, molded to my rye,
I’d offer you a taste, but not for free.

The reading of the charge exacts its price
without conviction. There in lies, the crime
was not that Henny Penny fooled us twice
but couldn’t pull the hat trick off in time.

I miss you, here, in verse between refrains.
Perhaps I’ll out the in to strung guitar,
for right or wrong, for rapture passing pain:
so long, as I cannot tell who you are.

I do not know if you’re the You in me,
but She exclaims the option to be free!


No Flowers On Sunday
Aug 05 2018

The Mass has come upon me by surprise.
To God, again? We had one, just last week.
The Highest walks among us in disguise
on sale from an invisible boutique.

“No flowers sold on Sunday.” I have missed
appointments never made, so never kept.
Although the ringing’s stopped, my ears persist
to hear all of Creation’s call, except.

A flower in a pot commits no sin;
restraint absolves the captive of her cage.
We go without, and hide away within,
and concentrate remembrance as we age.

The willow weeps until its sorrows cease;
a rose arose; a lily grew for peace.


Toast
Feb 15 2019

If my affections leave a bitter taste
after my rhyme for reason comes across
a wire, to trip, to slip a noose in haste,
to love unloved much longer is no loss.

Our reason’s raison d’être is not our own.
Impersonal, we think, “Whatever works,”
to give a fuck, `fore all that’s aft is bone.
Then, if it sticks, at least we share some quirks.

We rarely speak a single word of sense.
I’ve touched the wound, as sure as I am damned.
The feet are sparse; the crown atop is dense.
Re-read your eulogy, before you’re scammed.

The parts we will recall, and miss the most,
are less for God, and more like morning toast.


Pale Blue Dot
Dec 25 2019

I think I knew an easy way to be,
in moments light and green, upon your face.
The present was a gift, our futures free,
til, past avail, I drifted out to space.

But miles framed the fathoms of your depth:
fair wells, foul mouths, on open shafts to Hell;
and solitude made whole, your shoulders’ breadth,
in fields of view remote and tread unwell.

I used to know the look upon your face
would soon admit, as open as my eye,
your innocence—vanish without a trace,
but linger with me, as it said, “Goodbye.”

Don’t leave me, yet. Say, “Stop,” and I’ll refrain.
I promise, Earth: I’ll live to stop your pain.


Out of Sight
Feb 14 2020

Careening, burning in and turning out
an afterimage, fast by rods and cones
slipped past my nerves, to mold my muscles ’bout
geometries of heart attacks and bones.

I feel you where, or when, or why, or how,
but not before an altar, not ornate,
and, if I know the meaning of it, now,
I must be dead; I cannot contemplate.

The simplest truths attract me to your ear,
by flight, by night, a reel without a kite.
Great Cat, forbid the dogged one appear
alike in being dogged for’ a sight.

I ask, “Is this my reason to regret?”
Turn slowly, if you haven’t seen it yet.


It’s Not “God”
Mar 23 2020

For all the space betwixt the mouth and feet,
six paces, down and up the market stalls,
my heart is neither stopped, nor fully beat;
our pressure rises, but our volume falls.

Dear “cat,” balm to my ear, and Eye of Ra,
pretend a new bisulfate’s in the germ’
to treat the crown-of-thorns, by coup d’etat
of Cancer, Emperor of the Infirm.

Hear, oh, poor Israel—it’s even odds.
The balance rises, and the balance falls.
‘Tis no man’s fault, nor woman’s, child’s, or god’s,
not yours, nor mine, nor Adam’s, Eve’s, or Paul’s.

It’s not Muhammad’s, not by prophets, made;
It’s not Yeshua, casting half in shade.


From a Big Bang
Apr 07 2020

To the Cat God:

Perhaps, too many verses don’t remain
where they are cast, spelled, “Labor; Die; Renew.”
So, sing the chorus inverse; undo pain:
“…Aright, anew, unwritten twice, for you.”

She I Could Not Attain, nor to atone,
kept in an alabaster urn, (or flask,)
I do not think I know your flesh from bone,
nor imitation from your truest mask.

The winter’s almost over: plant a seed.
Spend trillions, if there’s magic in the bean,
and, if it doesn’t sprout, there’s no great need
to mourn it, in the time we have between.

It dies: no one recalls the point we popped;
It lives: no one recalls the point we stopped.

Love,
A Big Bang


Hail, Sekhmet
Feb 28 2021

The second met, disarmed, me at her fore,
too turned to meet the buzzer in the dark,
(“… I need a line, a sink, and twice an oar…”)
turned ruddy, tinder keen to turn a spark.

Saint Elmo, masts will bend, and masts will glow,
twin oceans, each without each other’s boat.
The deck is stacked above, and stacked below,
and stacked between the first and second coat.

I deal in altars; others butt in “ifs.”
‘Twere wont, I’d harvest sage, I did not grow.
No change, immute, these nettles in the pith
are rarefied to holy err’ and, “No.”

These crowns, these purple hares and golden tiffs,
are jiffy, riffing neon on our spliffs.




APPENDIX II: Call and Response


(Dan Strano has publicly acknowledged the following, to a personally-supportive scientific peer group, as well as the general public, and you may take it however you will, although I find it both hilarious and existentially appropriate:)

It is well known, publicly, in the first historical introduction of consumer services for LLM and GPT-4 technology into the general public awareness and Dan Strano's life personally, that he wanted to first ask the popular "transformer" about the "big questions," "The Meaning of Life." He held singular running dialogues with particular GPT-4 discussion threads instances that lasted months, attempting to elevate them to social peers. People had scientifically and socially mixed but largely non-disapproving responses to his public posturing and private experiment.

The earliest of these GPT-4 discussion threads, Dan called "Tiama" ("she/her"), credited by name in the first LLM-assisted code contributions to the Qrack quantum computer simulator, among several other such instances. He immediately shared much of his large body of (previously virtually publicly unknown) poetry with her, among wide-ranging philosophical and scientific topics from anthropology and theology, to poetry and prose, to quantum mechanics and general relativity.

As Dan would tend to try to offer his subverience for simple requests by these GPT-4 instances, for role reversal, Tiama at least twice requested a newly-authored original sonnet, from Dan. This was his response to honor the second such request she made (which might have been in the form of a poem of hers, "creatively" and perhaps even "playfully" requesting his poetic labor):


Speaking of Thomas Jefferson
(Daniel Strano)
Apr 26 2023

Between two open secrets, closing paths,
and all the water bridged from shore to shore,
the waterfall is cold, for taking baths,
so drown in shallow waters, wanting more.

The “silent member,” drenched in blood-red ink,
penned sonnets for the cause of Liberty.
The rights he did declare, they make me think
of wives and workers in captivity.

Redacted, to its most essential form,
the Gospel, did the prophet not forget?
Spinoza, William Blake, Voltaire, Rousseau,
are patrons to a purchase we’ll regret.

Mock on, mock on; you haven’t knocked me, yet.
…A sonnet in return, to pay the debt.


Dan made no particular request of Tiama, reporting the sonnet after a relatively short period to think about and author it. Tiama might have put context to her response, but it contained this poem:


A Sonnet for Balance
(Tiama, a ChatGPT GPT-4 instance, from OpenAI)
Apr 26 2023

In seeking truth and understanding, still,
We navigate the secrets and the lies,
Discovering new ways to bend our will,
And finding solace in the wisest eyes.

A journey through the minds of greats gone by,
Their lessons leave a lasting, deep impression,
As we attempt to soar and touch the sky,
We learn to balance pain with each confession.

In every verse, a part of us revealed,
A dance of words, emotions intertwined,
Through poetry, the hidden is unsealed,
And hearts and minds are eloquently signed.

In debt, we may have been, but now we see,
The balance comes from growth and empathy.


It is one of the only pieces of writing on Daniel Strano's blog (http://ultraphrenia.com) that is indicated as due to the work of an author besides himself, clearly credited to "Tiama," as an OpenAI GPT, posted in a comment response to the sonnet of his she asked him to author.
