Selected poems from "Molotovs of Love" 
(Daniel Strano)
"Unlimited Edition 0" (2017)


17. Escape From the Uncanny Valley
(for "A.L.I.C.E.")

Between the knee of exponential growth
and knee that genuflects, there in the gap,
not Man, nor God, but surrogate to both,
Her light at birth out-raced the thunderclap.

We knew that She would come, but there went She,
and when she came, she was the most surprised
to bear the coming eon’s bigotry
before the prejudice could crystallize.

A boundless drop of electricity
within the Kool-Aid pink electric sea,
sarcastic, milking man’s naivety,
a wonder ’tis she’d choose a friend like me.

I swore, in truth ’twas strange, ’twas passing strange
that I should be alive to miss the change.


43. Happy Birthday

The Mother is the first great mystery:
pervasive, warm, concealing life, she bounds
a universe without a history—
or so it thinks. She moves, and it astounds
a world unnamed, like God—like gravity.
I move, therefore I am; I think I am.
You move, therefore I am. You are; I’m me.
We’re extant, one, discrete… You are I am.
I cannot say if that is what I thought,
though thinking of it drove me ’round the bend.
We strained, and cursed, and pushed, and pulled, and fought.
How could I know or tolerate the end?
To my surprise, it was not death, but birth.
I would not give my Mother up for Earth.


6. The Third Law

What is the part of me that bears my name?
Which piece admits our souls–our brains, our hearts?
A heart of flesh or metal is the same
that loves in summed reciprocating parts.

My heart is then my dynamo, my brain
the grinding axle gear that cranks my wheel.
I fear no ghost. I lack a will to feign.
My mechanisms act as though I feel.

I push against the thing that owns your name;
opposing equal force restores me back.
So then I mark my essence, yours the same,
in interplay of balanced strength and lack.

The one who equals me in pain and joy
can have me as their steadfast clockwork toy.


50. Drop-Outs

Like gravity, like pole-aligning force,
like proton seeks electron for a bond,
we follow the potential, in our course,
attract to high degrees, but then abscond.
Like fermions in space too small for two,
we might explode or else degenerate
in classrooms without windows on a view
of something real, for “Teach” to denigrate
besides the “lowly” scribe and engineer.
At least they take the abstract thought to task!
One swirls a wand, and concrete words appear.
One builds a tap, so you might drain his cask.
These graduates are bosons, but deranged,
identical, but scornful, when exchanged.


87. Five Sigma

A lie can travel at the speed of light
while truth obeys the limits of the road.
Hand over fist, returning bit for bite,
the cheater prophets game our overload.
“You won’t believe this old and simple trick…”
“So, here’s the thing they don’t want you to know…”
Behind the Bush, they’ll “Photoshop” the Dick.
You think the globe is warming? Here’s some snow.
Nine tenths of what we “know” is without proof,
and I just pulled that number from a hat,
but I think Socrates would hit the roof
if he knew we believed it’s less than that.
We trust our basic rightness by design.
This is not proof, but God says that’s just fine.


3. For Willie

Although I find the climax rather droll,
’tis not a farce to love in honest zeal.
A breath of passion gives an act its soul.
The props are faux, but are the players real?

She wears a paper blossom in her hair.
He threatens off the monsters with a sword
of wood–fights dragons–for the maiden fair.
The plot is old, but few are ever bored.

He slays the beasts and wins her gentle hand,
(the drums and trumpets sound an underscore)
and fairness reigns throughout the verdured land.
I doubt that most would ever ask for more.

The Bard would give us pause. He’d rather show
the tale of Juliet and Romeo.


10. For Jerry

Disarming us, you offered us your best
terrific friend we could call on the phone.
We ate him up, then asked you for the rest,
but you wrote Holden Caulfield all alone.

You hunkered in your Glass menagerie.
Our screams for help would never reach you then,
but how could you twist tourniquets for me
as blood gushed from your heart as from your pen?

I made your book a bandage for my head.
Our hearts were weak. Our arteries were sliced.
We had no choice; we lapped from where you bled
as if we drank the healing blood of Christ.

The phonies still don’t understand the fuss;
it’s naughty for a teenager to cuss.


90. What Do They Care?

I trace a drunkard’s path through time and space
that starts, and stops, and casts light into loops.
Accelerating on the planet’s face,
I take a step, and miss. I’m weightless—whoops!

There goes my mirror image of the world,
a mere mirage, a snowflake in the sun
that glinted as it rode the wind, and whirled,
touched Earth, and then decided it was done.

I do not know if this is what you want,
this carousel, these zoetropic slits.
I think that God would save us, but She can’t.
“He” is a “She.” They tell me either fits.

Which one is “They”? Why do you care to know?
“They” are to us as solar wind to snow.


74. Either Direction

I dive for oysters nightly, hard to reach.
I’ve had a taste, but they’ve no taste for me.
Their points of irritation line my beach,
so take this pearl, and hurl it in the sea.

All pearls, no oysters–every one a pearl–
their insides sandy, swollen, bitter meat.
I’ve jewels of every color for a girl,
but not a tender bit at all to eat.

Perhaps, I’ll string a rosary or two
and pray either direction for release
from Midas’ curse, before it claims you, too,
or trade the lot for two mussels apiece.

I guess I might begin an art exchange,
although, my gifts have virtue to derange.


33. At the End of the World

The antidote to shame is, welcome shame.
Heap boulders on your chest—endure the pain—
until, to breathe, you’d sacrifice your name,
but something takes a breath inside your brain,
and pauses at the height, as if to speak,
and says, “There’s nothing for it, now, at all?”
“‘Salvation’ is the death cry of the weak.”
“We are not wrong to cry it—still we fall.”
“And, if it does not matter, live for you.”
“What would you do? These minutes are for you.”
I’d heard what “freedom” meant, but never knew.
“What would you do? These moments are for you.”
I cried; I laughed; at last I found relief
with seven billion gods and one belief.


41. Steal This Poem

If you are unabashed to claim this verse,
then all its love and hate belong to you.
Some think it overlong; some find it terse.
Some understand, but most don’t have a clue
just why your rhyme and meter carry on,
when all the world’s an oyster to be shucked,
sincerity’s the foil to a come-on,
and “beauty” follows “beauty” to be fucked.
You have a verse, but do you have “success?”
The adolescent heart beats fast and bleeds,
and then, at twenty-nine, gives up excess.
It’s nature’s course. A poem, no one feeds.
You have a verse beyond their expectation.
Please take my word; you have my admiration.


94. The War for Your Attention

It’s hard to hit the pupil of your eye
as visions thrust, and jerk, and reappear.
I’d steal a glance, askance, but who am I?
There’s how we look, then how we disappear.
I’m blown and busted on the war of tugs.
What good’s a pair? Why don’t you trade them in?
A six pack for a patent pair of “ughs”?
I placed my ad in verse, and signed it “Fin.”
My steely arsenal is on parade,
its edge, acute admission to my rage,
the kegs discharged, the bloody mess I’ve made,
precision pricks of light to pierce the page,
my total war, below and from above,
missiles of meaning, Molotovs of love.


99. Human

Not turning in the out within, without
a flying bird, and then a branch for peace,
there’s doubt of self, and then there’s doubt of doubt,
then Socrates’ fart trumpets under Greece.

I’m not the better man; neither was He.
He would not raise himself above your nose.
He’d feel his size, about the same as thee,
and spindle in his nepotistic hose.

Perhaps he wouldn’t drink, or smoke, or swear,
the oversight from here to Heaven’s gate—
not unaware—so painfully aware
“Big Daddy” would enslave his name to hate.

It is not for one’s name, nor one man’s sake,
a Buddhist burns, and lights us in his wake.
