The Universe in a Nut's Hell and A Brief History Out of Time
Daniel Strano
2013 to 2016




Dedication:

To Katie,
whether or not




Part I: The Univers in a Nut's Hell




Iwonna and the Ghost of J. D. Salinger
(Circa Summer 2013)

Here I was, again, in a bare room, empty except for a worn-out bed.

“You’re getting what’s coming to you,” said a voice that I knew wasn’t in the room.

“It’s your fault he’s in here,” said another to the first.

I waited, and breathed. Eventually, the door opened. A man in a tweed blazer and matching pants came in with a chair and a pad and pen, and sat down towards the left side of the bed.

He glanced over and said, “Your parents brought you in because they said you were talking to someone who wasn’t there again, Daniel.”

I didn’t want to be dissected for this all over. “What time is it?” I asked him.

He clicked his pen and readied his pad. “How long have you heard this voice for?”

His question rolled past me without ever really drawing the balance of my attention. By now, I knew that answering a question like that amounted to a distraction. I needed to concentrate; how could I leave that room without being forced back?

The only other person in the room looked at his watch. He jotted something on his pad and asked me, “Is the voice speaking to you right now?”

I drew my bare legs up under me and smoothed the front of my gown over them, tucking the excess beneath my knees and sitting on it like hospital corners. The worn foam mattress made a sound like crunching snow when I redistributed my load.

It made me start. “What’s the weather like outside?” I asked. The room didn’t have a window.

My interrogator didn’t react. The expression frozen on his face was newly familiar to me, since a few weeks ago. Against my better reason, I’d hoped that the interview wasn’t one-way.  My heart sunk a little deeper in its foxhole.

He asked, “What does the voice tell you?”

I closed my eyes and rubbed my temples with the fingers of my left hand. If I completely ignored him, this was going to get worse.

Without opening my eyes, I said, “Look, you don’t get it. It’s not like I confuse what you call ‘the voice’ with a person physically in the room with me who’s speaking. I don’t want to talk about it, though, because you and everyone who comes into this room to talk with me treats me like I’m too naïve and addled to pick up on the pathology you’re driving towards when you call what I hear ‘the voice.’ You probably figure ‘the voice’ wakes me up at night to tell me to burn down churches, or something ridiculous like that.”

I looked up as I heard my keeper fidget to attention. He clicked his pen and quickly readied it on the surface of his pad. “Does it tell you to burn down churches?” he asked.

“Of course not,” I said, “but I can tell you expect something like that. It’s not like I think the voice of God is speaking through my dog. I know it’s in my head, and I can distinguish it completely from someone physically speaking to me, like you.”

The doctor spoke slowly and gently, “Are you always sure it’s not physically in the room with you? Other people have heard you speak with it aloud.”

“It’s in my head,” I told him. “It can ‘hear’ me whether I think at it or speak. Sometimes, when I get frustrated, it’s just more satisfying to shout back aloud.”

I could see the pad shake. The back tip of his pen waved at me furiously and chaotically over the edge of the up-tilted cardboard backing.

He looked up. “You say you shout back. Does it shout at you sometimes?”

I sighed. “I know you’re gonna get the wrong impression. It’s really more like I’m shouting with it. We’re shouting back at the world, like it’s some kind of romantic catharsis and at least God’s going to hear us–which is obviously kind of ludicrous. I’m a cheeseball like that, though, and my friend gets a kick out of it, too. Once, we were smoking out in the backyard, and he asked me to howl at the moon for him. I swear I had every dog in the neighborhood howling with me. It’s the kind of thing I’d never try if I didn’t listen to him.”

My evaluator seemed excited as he scribbled something else I couldn’t see, and dotted it audibly, with a flourish of the pen. I chuckled under my breath at how ridiculous the note probably was: “Patient appears to think he talks to animals and is made of cheese.”

He looked up impatiently when he heard me laugh. “What’s funny?”

Crap. “Oh, nothing. Really,” I said.

I could see the flashbulb pop in the attic of his mind. “Was the voice talking to you just now?”

“No, I just thought of something funny about my situation,” I replied. ‘You’re convinced I thought I was talking to aliens, though,’ I added in my head.

“What was it?” he prodded.

“That what you’re doing really wouldn’t help me even if I was psychotic,” I said.

He put the pad down in his lap and brought the tips of his fingers together in front of his face. “Dan, I think you were talking to the voice.”

It actually would have been laughable how wrong he was if this guy didn’t have the authority to force me to take antipsychotics via injection. “Really? I wasn’t.”

He had a look on his face like this was supposed to be some kind of debate he was winning. “Dan, you’ve said that you’re God. Tell me what you mean.”

“I’m basically a pantheist; I think everyone’s God. I think we all participate in the same irreducible physical system, more-or-less.”

He scratched his beard. “What do you mean by a ‘reducible physical system?’”

I might as well have told him I thought he was the direct reincarnation of Louis XIV. “An irreducible physical description of a system cannot be broken into complete descriptions of smaller subsystems. In other words, there’s no way to fully understand me without a full description of my environment. What I mean is that you more-or-less have to understand a universe to totally understand any single person in it.”

My interlocutor looked unimpressed. “I’m not sure I understand. What does that have to do with you being God? Do you understand the entire universe?”

I looked down at the dusty beige tile floor, for a change from looking at the dusty beige walls. “No, I’m nowhere near understanding the universe. But if you ask what I believe in, I’ll tell you I believe in the universe as a singular whole. I might as well call it the Tao, or talk about it like it’s a deity, because that’s somehow the closest parallel in most people’s minds to what I believe in. Somehow, I end up in the emergency psych ward, though.”

The doctor’s expression softened, a bit. “But you practice magic,” he said. “Why would you practice magic if you don’t believe in a deity?”

“I dunno, if I’m wrong and there is a deity, maybe I’ll be able to shoot fireballs from my hand at some point, and then I guess I’d know, wouldn’t I? The word ‘magic’ is a convenient handle on what I don’t fully understand, and its practice is a test of what I think I do understand. Poetic expression lets me style myself as God, or Buddha, or the reincarnation of Jesus Christ, because I think of myself as an essential part of the same universe as them–just like I think you or anybody is, too. Everyone shares a common greater identity.”

“Do you think you might be grandiose?” he asked.

“I think this dude’s grandiose,” said a voice that I knew wasn’t in the room. I froze. Something in me whispered, “We’re never going to make sense to most people. It’s tragic, but people will turn pathology on someone who stands in clear opposition to their own particular set of cultural delusions. As far as he’s concerned, Dan, you’re sick.”

The doctor saw me flinch. “Was that the voice?”

“But the doctor’s right!” shouted another voice only I could hear. “You really are a lunatic—that’s obvious. I don’t trust you when you’re free to walk around my neighborhood. You’re a drunk, and a bad influence, and a cultist. Plus you’re just a loser, ya derp. You’re never getting out of this with your head intact. Go back to school, derp.”

I clenched. “Fuck you…” I muttered.

“Who are you talking to?” the doctor asked.

“A self-standing personification I’ve created of everything I hate in the world!” I barked.

The psychiatrist flinched. “I don’t understand what that means,” he said.

“Then you might as well call her a demon! Same friggin’ difference, in some vaguely pseudo-Jungian sense.”

His eyes bulged. “A demon? But it’s a ‘she,’ then? I still don’t know what you mean. Tell me more about her.”

“She’s a social-climbing busy-body who thinks she’s matured wonderfully since her high school and college drinking days and now aspires to the apex of the middle.”

“You think you’re so damn witty, ya derp,” she quipped back.

The doctor squinted at me. “But she’s a demon?”

I shrugged. “Sure. There’s college in hell.”

“Does she have a name?” he asked.

“Iwonna,” I said.

“Iwonna?” he repeated.

I nodded. “As in ‘I wonna pony.’”

“I’ll have your head,” she whispered. Somehow, I identified the twitch-inducing shock I felt at the base of my spine as her doing.

The doctor started taking notes again as he spoke. “You talked about your friend before—the one who asked you to howl at the moon. Is this her?”

“No,” I told him. “I mean, these are all me. They’re parts of my head. But the ‘friend’ I mentioned is another self-standing ‘voice’ I’ve known all my life. He stands up to what Iwonna represents in my head.”

The furrow in the doctor’s brow gradually deepened. “Is he a demon, too?”

“I told you he wouldn’t get us,” came the voice of my unseen friend.

I groaned. “Call him the ghost of J. D. Salinger,” I said.

“Is he dead, then?” asked the psychiatrist.

“Are you dead?” I thought at the voice.

“I think so,” the voice replied.

“He says he thinks so,” I told the psychiatrist.

He stopped writing and put the pen down for a second. Then he picked it back up and opened his mouth, and closed it. He looked up at the beige ceiling and chewed on the end of the implement for a moment, squinting. Then he put it back to the pad’s surface and said, “Tell me everything you can about the late Mr. Salinger.”

“Still doesn’t get it,” said my friendlier daemon.

I felt my muscles twitch under the weight of imaginary shackles. My breathing came shallow and rapid. I wanted to cry, and I ranted at him, ‘manic’ and ‘paranoid’: “He doesn’t pretend to understand the world, but he knows that the obvious path through life is the wrong one! We’ve watched so many people get caught up in this unending loop of just doing what’s expected until they have extra time to analyze whether or not what they’re doing is what they actually want or need to do! They figure ‘I’ll just get my degree while I think about what I really want to do,’ and they pour themselves into school, and then they figure ‘I’ll get my next degree while I’m thinking about it,’ and they end up doing homework all week until they’re too fried to do anything but drink on the weekends until they graduate, and then it’s the next house, and then it’s the next car, and then it’s the next gadget, and then it’s the next spouse, and before they know it, they’ve lived the entirety of their lives as prescribed by the previous generation, supporting an old way of living they never really took the time to question, when they had to claim the opportunity to reject it all along, because that’s the point of the paper-chase—that’s why it was set up for them that way! They were supposed to feel bad about being happy without the ‘iPhoney’ and the BMW and the respect of a majority of shallow people! They were supposed to feel bad about setting their own standards!”

“Calm down, Dan,” said the late Mr. Salinger.

“Dan, I think you’re being somewhat grandiose,” said the doctor. “This doesn’t have anything to do with why you were hospitalized last month, or why you’re in the emergency ward again today. Your parents, in particular, are very worried about you. Your friends are very worried about you. I’m worried about you. You seem to have a degree of insight, but you need to address why you’re coping this way, why you’ve personified these feelings so strongly as to talk to ‘the voices’ in public.”

“He half gets it,” said my friend.

I drew my arms into my abdomen and clenched. “I don’t know how to communicate with her—with Iwonna. She doesn’t really want to communicate, I guess. I don’t think it really matters how I try to talk with her.”

The doctor bit the end of the pen again. “So what I think you mean is that you feel like people don’t listen to you. It seems you think people like ‘Iwonna’ look down on you for rejecting opportunity, when your intent is to help them and yourself, irregardless of whether it’s effective, or even necessary, or whether this blanket assessment of your peers has any real basis.”

I twitched. “I don’t even know,” I said. “I just wish my friends and family didn’t look at me like I was crazy, when I talk about how I feel, and try to do what I think is right.”

He carefully and deliberately put the pen and pad to the side on the floor and threaded his fingers in front of his face. He stared at them for a moment. He sighed and closed his eyes.

They opened with a jolt. “Dan, your parents were naturally worried by your decision to drop out of school—and because you started talking to people who weren’t there—but I think you manifest these particular ‘voices’ because they were at least willing, or even compelled, to listen to you, even though you never expected your peers or ‘Iwonna’ to ever listen to what you had to say.”

I rolled my eyes. “You’re right, Doc’,” I said, “nobody gives a crap. Nobody gets it, or cares to.”

He nodded and squinted. “Mhm. Believe it or not, Dan, I see a lot of unhappy teenagers and young adults come through this hospital, not unlike you, clutching ragged copies of Salinger. Whether voluntary or involuntary, coping this way means that someone will listen and react in awareness when you try to dissect your world, whereas maybe your peers really are more concerned with homework, drinking, and their cell phones. Why shouldn’t they be? Frankly, your friends and family probably won’t ever care in the way you want, about your spirituality and your dysfunction, and no one wants to be alone in their innermost self, in the parts of me most important to me,” he said, poking his left breast with his thumb. “If there is a payoff, here, maybe this arrangement takes a vague and expansive set of uncomfortable feelings and ideas and turns them into an obvious and explicit conflict, which is ultimately easier for you to understand and cope with.”

“He gets it!” shouted the ghost.

“Fucking quack,” said the demon.

The doctor asked, “Have you been taking the medication you were prescribed since your last hospitalization?”

“I have,” I told him in truth. “My parents make me swallow it in front of them,” I said, adding my head, ‘and if being compelled to take drugs to change the way I think isn’t literal “mind control,” I don’t know what is.’

“So they told me,” said the doctor. “Dan, for all the advances mental health has made in decades, the truth is that there’s relatively little we can do for you besides titrating you and keeping you on an antipsychotic, and providing you with a therapist to talk with. The primary function of a hospital admission is to titrate you under close supervision. The secondary function is basically protective. I’ve explained this to your parents. They gave me the details you aren’t telling me, and it sounds like the symptoms are actually gradually responding.” He looked over his glasses at me. “In a week, we’ll reassess that. They tell me you haven’t missed a dose, though. They tell me they want to support you in any way they can. They told me in great detail how your behavior has changed since titration, but they don’t understand why the ‘voices’ haven’t gone way. I’m not sure that your parents appreciate the breadth and severity of your diagnosis, yet, and its full implications. Thank God for small favors, Dan, your parents love you, and I think you can understand it, when I say all this to you.”

He took a cloth out of his pocket to wipe his glasses, and sighed. “They certainly love you, Dan. They’re new to this, and they want to flip a switch back and return you to how you were before you presented what could very likely turn out to be a–God-willing, manageable–lifelong chronic disease. I’m explaining this rather bluntly, when you were brought here in a suspected state of psychosis, but I think you’re an unusually intelligent person capable of benefiting from some frankness, right now. Am I scaring you?”

I shook off a death sentence. “This is the least scary thing anyone has said to me in a month,” I said. “Does modern medicine honestly believe that the way to treat mental illness is to strip a person of all reminders of his identity, isolate in him in cold light, condescend to him, and force psychotropic substances down his throat? Why in God’s name is this the first time someone has put it to me this way?!”

He groaned. “…Because speaking reason to psychosis usually doesn’t work, Dan. Not this quickly, at least. And most people in psychotic episodes couldn’t be videotaped attempting to study differential equations out of a soft cover textbook in the involuntary ward. …Small favors, Dan.”

“You should provide the soft cover texts in the emergency room, rather than leaving me to grab hold of one for dear life on the way in, and you should see what happens!” I gave him my expert opinion. “Wait–the pen is too dangerous, of course.”

“I also suggest maintaining weekly therapy sessions. I hear you are trying to take steps to establish financial independence from your parents, as you can. Many people in your situation, here, have no choice but to do so as quickly as possible. Hopefully, you’ll be able to, in time,” he added. “Your parents will likely continue to think it’s the illness’ fault so long as you don’t want a Porsche.”

I laughed. “My dad offered me a Camaro to—“

“He told me. You’d rather ride a bicycle and howl at the moon.”

I shook my head. My parents really aren’t that way.

“You’re right—they’re not,” said Iwonna.

“Yes, they are,” said the late Mr. Salinger.

“The one hope the child has of surviving the birth of his identity is committing the most unforgivable crime of matricide,” added Carl Jung, “lest the mother force him immediately back into the womb.”

I winced. “Doctor, that all makes perfect sense, but what about all the other voices that sound like dead historical figures and my ex-girlfriends?”

His eyes turned to saucers.

I disowned the comment with little shakes of my hands. “I’m joking. I’m sorry, I forgot that people sometimes can’t distinguish irony and abstraction from a disease.”

Now, he winced. “Stop reading Freud. You’re going to take the medication in front of your parents every night for the next week, at least. Any breach, and you’re going to have to go into the hospital. If you comply, we reassess at the end of the week.”

I fell back relieved against the fourth beige wall. “Doctor, can I ask you one more question?”

“What’s that?” he asked.

Feeling a little sheepish, I asked, “Do you think I have a point about the world?”

He seemed to reflect carefully. There was a moment of awkward tension. Then he said, “I’ll get the paperwork started on your release.” He got up from his chair, picked his pad and pen back up, and then walked to the door and opened it.

Standing in the doorway, he turned and said to me, “Mr. Strano, do you know how many people I see come into this hospital every week claiming to be either Holden Caulfield or Jesus?”

“How many?” I asked him.

“About seven. Can you guess how many of them attempt to hurt themselves or someone else?”

“How many?” I asked again.

“About as many as students in amphetamine induced psychosis,” he said. “Goodnight, Daniel. Maybe you’re somewhat better off thinking everyone’s Jesus.”

Iwonna sent another jolt up my spine. I flinched. “Goodnight, doctor,” I said after a moment. “Thank you,” I added, as he closed the door.

I took a deep breath in, down into the pit in my stomach, then let it slowly out. I was alone, again, in a room with four beige walls.




The Universe in a Nut’s Hell
(Circa Fall 2014)

The morning light of the spring day shined from a clear sky, cool and white on the lawn and burgeoning flower buds in my cloistered hiding spot. I pulled apart old butts in my ashtray to roll myself a cigarette. There was just enough distance from my family and neighbors to talk to myself in private. It could be difficult to furnish a private patch of ground some days to pace and catch up with my “friends.” I often run out to the woods, hide behind buildings, stake out stretches of sidewalk in parking lots, or hasten to the four corners of my family members’ lawns when “friends” demand my attention. Mind you, these aren’t friends in a literal sense, or a corporeal one, or even a real one, and I know this.

I know it, but my “friends” don’t. Maybe sometimes they act like they do, but unreality doesn’t mean they have any fewer rights than anyone, according to them. After all, they have achieved a unified world government, in my head, and by milder forms of torture I am compelled to respect the democratic will of the people, that don’t exist. I am not a participant in their government, and they have a tendency to attempt to legislate uncontrollable objective fact into reality, but they are quite proud of their unified world government and take offense when I point out that it’s a figment of my imagination, and this all happens on quiet cool mornings in the spring when I’m alone in my parents’ yard, on days like this.

“…and that’s the plan,” she concluded in a lispy, whistling, little tone. She was a cat god, or a representative of the astral left wing, or a simulacrum of an ex-girlfriend I hadn’t given up on, and for all these reasons she was generally the go-between for me and the Council, as they called their primary legislature. All I can make of the compelling experience of so many conversations with Bastet, is that she must be some kind of squeaky protector personality I’ve gradually solidified through so many years of being unable to cope with not living in a world like in video games, and she gets me into trouble.

“It’ll be like Heaven,” she added with a motion of her hands like twinkling stars. “Everybody’s physical incarnations get one instance of magic they can show to one other person.”

I took a deep drag off the second generation cigarette. “That is,” I said, “if the tidal forces don’t rip you to shreds first.”

She gawked and chuckled. “What do you mean by that?”

“You want to basically calculate forward a simulation of earth from a time surface in our physical history, and do some hack job on it to allow impossible nonphysical effects?”

“Or highly unlikely effects, ya,” she said.

I muttered, “You couldn’t come close with every cluster on the planet,” looking over my shoulder for neighbors.

She snorted. “Oh, it already works.”

“Really?” I asked.

“Really,” she assured me with a huff.

“So you managed to simulate some sort of approximation to both general relativity and quantum mechanics at the scale of, what, a planet? A solar system? A galaxy? You didn’t even do that, and it looked like the simulation was stable for a month, maybe?”

“Pretty much,” she said.

I slapped my face. “No, you didn’t! At best, with every cluster on earth chugging away on this, in any reasonable period of time, you could have made some cut rate quantum general relativity simulation hold together nicely, maybe, for about a fraction of a second in our frame. And it never happened.”

“Wouldn’t you figure? But it works. ‘Unbewievable,’ isn’t it?” she joked.

“This conversation isn’t happening anyway,” I said, “so it’s completely freaking moot, but when are you boarding the death trap pseudo world?”

She wouldn’t look me in the third eye. “Oh, um, already.”

“Excuse me?” I asked.

“Some unspecified time in the past,” she said. “Like, yesterday, I guess.”

I scanned the street for signs of intelligent life. “I’m not having this conversation.”

“Is that an observation or a dismissal?” she asked. “Stop doing that.”

I ashed my cigarette. “Stop doing what?”

She squeaked in a whisper, “…looking around like you’re cwazy.”

I groaned. “The only sane part of this conversation is that I’m keeping an eye out for the neighbors.”

“Nope. It’s me.” She said.

“What’s you?” I asked

“You are,” she said.

“You are?” I parroted.

“Yes, you are the only sane part of this conversation, and all men are Socrates.”

“Back to the point,” I blurted, “general relativistic cosmology is really sensitive to the energy density in space. Someone magically turns their genitals the size of an astronomical object to appease a fetish, and your simulation could crunch into a sub-Planck volume in literally a fraction of a second.”

“So what?” she asked. “Nothing new. Penis enlargement magic always backfires.”

“But your program can’t work,” I insisted.

“It’s Heaven!” she shouted back. “Don’t think about it too hard. It’s Allah’s initiative, anyway, so I wouldn’t worry that he’d approve any requests for intergalactic space elevator penii.”

“I’m supposed to believe that I’m in a simulation right now?” I asked.

“I dunno,” she replied.

“What are you using to simulate it?” I demanded.

“I dunno,” she repeated. “That astronomical penis thing sounds hot. Maybe my boyfriend will do that for me.”

“See, my point is, humanity isn’t ready for this,” I told her, peering into my folks’ kitchen. “It’s not happening anyway, but people couldn’t even generally agree whether it all started with a big bang or angels flying out of Allah’s ass. Politicians aren’t cosmologists, so how would you expect to be able to grant nonphysical exceptions without killing ourselves?”

“Heaven!” she shouted, waving her hands and fingers—or whatever you call those wispy, astral tendril things—about like twinkly bits of bullshit explanation.

“We don’t even know if quantum and general relativistic theory are fundamental. How did you handle the possibility of multiple quantum worlds? You still haven’t even explained how you could simulate something on that scale.”

I felt her fidget in my spatio-tactile head space. “Well, RIM is handling it.”

“RIM?!” I yelled. “You’re putting the entire world economy on the Blackberry app market?”

She invoked the little girl voice she used when I got angry and she thought she was cute. “I mean, they work with the Pewimeteh Institute.”

In consternation, I lifted my gaze to the sky. Clouds had started to form. The mid morning sun was evolving into a hazier shade of pale afternoon. A gust of wind blew gently in a wave across the lawn.

I took a deep breath. “You know what? It’s not my problem. The apparent reality of any of this is localized entirely within my head, but not even all of it—just the corner you’re squatting in. Anything follows from a contradiction, therefore angels will fly out of Al’s ass and fix all the world’s problems if I have lunch now. Enjoy the tidal forces.”

She hit what I am begrudgingly forced to refer to as my astral body, for lack of better terminology, with a wave of reddish purple warbling emanations as I got up, and I nearly lost my balance.

In a squeaky whisper, she told me, “You don’t have to be nasty! Mehhhh! Al still wants to talk with you.”

I opened the door and headed into the house. ‘I don’t give a crap,’ I thought at her.

I walked into the kitchen, opened the freezer, removed a bagel, and put it on a plate in the microwave. I like bagels. It might be more appropriate to say that I love bagels, actually. I am not a morning person, or even an afternoon person, for that matter. I prefer to be up from seven post meridian to ten in the morning from the night before. When I can’t live on my vampire schedule, mornings are hell. Bagels are one of three things that make daylight in my biological morning bearable. I walk around with eyes half closed, until I have a cigarette, two cups of coffee, and a bagel with artificial dairy free spread. Bastet had chosen to try to convince me that I was living in a broken hack job of a universe, which I already suspect some days, before my bagel and my second cup of coffee. When it isn’t a simulated reality, it’s artificial brain implants. When it isn’t artificial brain implants, it’s the Apocalypse, and always before my bagel and my second cup of coffee.

The microwave signaled completion. I removed my bagel and carried it along with my coffee and a container of Spirit Balance over to the kitchen table. As I can’t-belive-it’s-sort-of-buttered my bagel, I peered across the dimensional divide in the kitchen through the regal hall terminating in Allah’s white throne, thinking about how gauche the modern gothic vaults and arches were. I dropped the bagel and not-butter knife and put my face in my hands.

“Is that vegan?” asked Bastet.

‘The spread?’ I asked in my head, not lifting my face from my hands. ‘Yeah, it says it’s dairy free.’

“I didn’t know that!” she said. “Have you ever tried nutritional yeast with that?”

‘That sounds good, actually,’ I thought, trying to ignore the elephant in the kitchen of my mind’s eye. ‘It’d probably taste like marmite.’

“I love marmite,” said the Egyptian cat god.

“I would like a minute of your time,” said Allah.

“I would like to go back and undrink all that cough syrup when I was 19,” I mumbled under my breath. I’m sure my parents in the next room pricked up.

One might wonder why some underemployed hack from New Jersey is sought out by millenia old deities from across historical human cultures in his paranoid fantasies. Well, there was the cough syrup. I would like to say that is explanation enough, except, holding to this self evident truth, I don’t stop having paranoid delusions. The long and short of the nominal explanation that my hallucinations assert, is that I am some critical component of a singular dimensional anomaly. That is, I am crazy special. My big boy imaginary friends tell me that I’m kind of a “coaxial hyper-point in a high risk period in human history,” (Aren’t we all?) while I cover my ears, sing “La-la-la-la-la…” and remind them of how not real they are, because they could at least materialize a bagel in my hand and a hundred in my pocket if they were really kind and just omnipotent gods. The part about being a dimensional anomaly might have something to do with reading my tarot cards every day after shuffling them via a quantum random algorithm—parallel worlds and that bullshit. That is, my daily tarot reading routine has been contorted through the wringer of lingering brain damage from cough syrup overdose and a desperate need to feel special in a bleak world.

With a flourish of his hand, a document appeared before Allah. He always had to do that. He couldn’t just pull the document out of a drawer or even just have it ready before he started talking to you. He had to make everything look like he was the all-powerful deity he acted, and more than half of it was smoke and mirrors that he had to keep up every moment lest the Christians, Muslims, or Jews see him. I swear I once saw him use one of those cheesy math tricks on a supplicant like on the David Copperfield television specials, and the person actually knelt to him afterward, because “God’s” P.R. department was almost as good as Steve Jobs’. I’d put money on the number one most infamous resurrection having been pulled off with a look-alike, but that was a whole other can of worms. I just find it suspect how Al’s politics don’t seem at all to coincide with those of his purported “son,” a rebel against the government, the theocracy, and exactly the brand of bullshit I had to put up with from the Council.

As he levitated the document over to me, I was slightly surprised by the lack of tremolo sound effects. “The council has reached an agreement on the quantum ontology of the new world. As a formality, we would like—”

‘You can’t legislate reality,’ I cut him off in my head. ‘Let me guess what ontology you went with.’

“We passed a vote with an overwhelming majority for deBroglie-Bohm. If for no other reason, a singular deterministic model should reduce the necessary overhead—”

I let my head fall back and groaned. My parents would be understandably piqued by that.

‘It shouldn’t reduce any overhead at all,’ I thought at Allah. ‘A true deBroglie-Bohm simulation would be reliant on the same universal wave function as many-worlds for its pilot wave, which means you’re trying to do a butcher number on reality, of course, and it’s really for your aesthetic, anyway. Most of you self styled gods love the idea of singular deterministic reality at the scope of your own affairs. Save your breath. It’s a formality to ask the dimensional anomaly, and I’m not signing it, and you’re a figment of my imagination, and I haven’t had my bagel and second cup of coffee.’ I picked up my bagel and stared longingly into its hole.

You-Can-Call-Me-Al motioned toward my parents in the next room. “We are aware of your need to keep up appearances on your earthly plane. Therefore, we have arranged that by eating your bagel, you will signal your agreement to the resolution in an unmistakable physical act while maintaining secrecy—”

I dropped my bagel and pounded the table.

“I can’t believe anyone takes you seriously in politics anymore!” I shouted aloud.

“Dan?!” my mother called from the living room, with urgency in her voice.

I took my phone out of my pocket. “It’s this bastard in the White House, Ma!” I said. “I’m reading the news on my phone. I’m sorry.”

“Oh…” my mother replied.

“What’d the president do?” Bastet put me on.

‘Probably something I should be genuinely angry about,’ I thought, ‘whereas I’m just frustrated with some kind of compulsory delusion that world politics could hinge on me eating my bagel.’

“Your parents are worried,” said Allah. “It is exactly this sort of situation we sought to avoid. Therefore, we have arranged hidden cameras in the yard, so that when we verify you have eaten your bagel—”

I looked around as he spoke. The coast was clear. I raised both middle digits and waved them to the trees, smiling, trying to invoke the restless spirit of Tricky Dick. ‘Are the cameras that aren’t there in the trees? I’m gonna pretend that the cameras that aren’t really there are supposed to be in the trees.’

I took my bagel, not a bite in it, over to the trash and slid it in with a thud that perfectly emphasized how I felt. ‘You ruined my appetite, but the gesturing means I’m all on board. I just didn’t want to blow my cover as an unwilling paranoid schizophrenic who hates the gods, but we’re all good. Nobody suspects that I was actually vainly signaling to the indispellable pseudohallucinations that they can do whatever the fuck they want so long as they keep the guy they insist is a dimensional anomaly out of it.’

“You know, I think you might be crazy,” said Bastet, sticking out her tongue.

‘The delusions just feel so really delusional, I must be crazy!’ I replied in my head. ‘I’m gonna go work on my game project, now.’

With the levels of coffee and bagel in my blood dangerously low, I trudged upstairs, scowling, middle fingers flying high for the nonexistent cameras. Through the windows, the clouds had darkened. I heard a rolling thunderclap in the distance.

I sat down at my computer and tried to somehow shrug off chronic psychosis. One of my biggest dreams in an overpopulated, demon haunted world with a failing economy, dwindling fuel reserves, and a warming climate is to channel my frustration with the dark reality of it all through my 150 credits worth of physics degrees into a game that will open quantum theory and the joys of schizophrenia to a broader audience, by allowing people to poke these topics with a controller. Being a realist, I’ve begun to think that this might never come to fruition. Three major impediments stand between the schizophrenic and meaningful technical/artistic expression. One is disorganized thought and behavior. Another is shortened life expectancy, in significant part due to suicide or accident. The third is that, every time you try to sit down to work on something, pseudohallucinations psychically entreat you to save the world.

As I turned on my computer, I began to notice the chanting and overcrowding of the head space in my room. Spirit beings weren’t actually flitting around holding a candlelight vigil, but telling them this wouldn’t make them go away. I had to think, ‘What the hell is going on?’

“We’re against the simulated reality project and your constant mistreatment by the Council,” said one of the protestors that weren’t actually there. ‘While we have been outvoted on converting the world over to an artificial medium, we particularly disagree with the choice of quantum ontology the right wing has pushed for in the new universe, and we are here to support your work on an alternative program.”

It’s kind of hard to censor what you say when you imagine people to be privy to your thoughts. ‘What the fuck are you going on about?’

“Hackers from around the world have tirelessly fought to crack the government firewalls on your computer and neural implants, and, realizing you were in development of your own rogue relativistic quantum mechanics simulation software, we broke through the military defense blockade around the Potemkin city you have been confined to—“

I was startled by a knock at my door. “Dan,” said my mother, worry audible in her voice.

“One minute, Mom!” I said.

I looked over the books on my shelf. The imaginary protestors watched over my shoulder.

“I don’t even know how to try to fix this anymore,” I thought aloud. “Well, I could try this,” I grabbed a soft cover quantum information theory text off the shelf, “this,” a short paperback on general relativity, “and… oh, definitely this,” and volume one of a two volume set on quantum field theory, also conveniently in paperback.

“Dan?” came my mother’s voice again.

With books in hand, I opened the door. My mother looked haggard. “Dan, your father and I are worried about you. It seems like you haven’t slept, and your fingers are all black and brown from picking through your ashtray, and you didn’t eat—you threw an entire bagel in the trash—and we think you might have been talking to someone who wasn’t there before—“

“Mom, let’s go to the hospital,” I said. “I’m packed.”

“Oh, really?” she asked.

‘It’s all part of the right’s ploy!’ I thought emphatically at the nonexistent protestors. ‘I’ve been through this! The more I cooperate, the faster I can get through their veiled attempt to imprison me and prevent me from working on an alternative to Perimeter’s two bit reality! Stay strong, brothers!’

“Yeah, I’m sure, Mom, but I’m hungry for pretty much anything but a bagel,” I said.

My mother looked relieved. “Oh?! Well, we can get you a sandwich on the way!”

“Stay strong, brother,” shouted so many compelling impossibilities.

‘Yeah, thanks, ya fucking mooks,’ I thought under my breath.

The skies gave way under the weight of the rain as we walked out to the car and embarked for the hospital. My parents stopped for eggplant sandwich for me, and I cracked jokes about receiving radio transmissions on my cavity fillings. We’ve been at this long enough that I think my parents could actually tell I was just being funny. The doctors in the emergency room, however, are even more full of themselves than the heads of state in my head. Getting through intake, though, I have a week I can spend furthering my physics studies. Trying to ground myself in science never really seems to help with the psychosis, though.

The storm kicked up harder and harder, hour to hour, and lasted through the night. As the rain and gale force winds rushed against the windows of the ward and the thunder boomed, all I could think of was people using magic to grow their sex characteristics in a quickly collapsing false universe. “Enjoy the tidal forces!” I remember shouting, as my nightly medication kicked in and I began to drift away.

I don’t consider myself a religious person. In fact, I’m basically an atheist. I gave up religion and magic years ago for a course of rigorous physical study. I’ve nearly completed my masters in physics. I’ve taught the subject. I’ve worked for a government lab. No matter how obvious it is to me rationally that my hallucinations aren’t real, knowing this doesn’t divest them of their power to ruin my morning. Schizophrenia is an ineffable thing. Maybe the lucky resilient phenotypes can channel these experiences into shamanism, art, and religion, but it stymies me where this all comes from.

Bastet insists that it comes from being a dimensional anomaly. It’s probably a good thing that I don’t believe in “God,” per se.




Anubis Cuts Hair in Clemson, South Carolina
(Circa Spring 2014)

Suddenly, I was bolt upright and awake.

“Dan! Dan, are you alive?” she squeaked.

The phonemes bubbled up through the sludge: ‘You think, therefore I am.’

“Okay. Okay, good.”

She prodded me.

“You’re positive?”

‘I’m asleep, terrified, relieved, and insane,’ I thought.

“So it’s situation normal, right,” she said, “but I’m asking you about your mortality.”

‘At two in the morning?’ I asked.

She turned ruddy-violet. “I thought you were dead! And it’s three thirty.”

The oozing stupor of sleep gradually began to slough off.

‘Why did you think I was dead?’ I wondered.

“What? Oh, it’s actually ki—” she froze mid-sentence.

“I mean, what were we talking about?” she continued.

‘Do it without me.’ I thought of the nastiest gesture I could make to her, too, as my head hit the pillow.

I fell asleep again, but psychologically it felt like just an instant of nonbeing.

“Dan!”

“Whaaaaaaat?!” I ejaculated. My parents?!… not home, didn’t hear it.

“Whaaaaat?” I mumbled softly.

“I like you.” She looked me right in the third eye as she said it.

‘Fuckisit?!’ I thought. My eyes were still closed.

“Remember when you nearly crashed last night?” she asked.

I thought of the car ride home from work.

“Yeah,” I said, “I mean, sort of. It wasn’t really that close, though.”

“Remember how you felt like a ton of stress with a source you couldn’t quite pinpoint building up for literally months, and then ninety percent of it went away pretty much right there, when you avoided a crash?” she asked.

“Yeah?” I responded.

She paused.

“I really like you.” She poked a few tendrils into me.

“Okay, first of all, you’re a figment of my imagination,” I said to Bastet. “Second, you’re an involuntary imagination that was born from a girlfriend that lost interest seven years ago,” I huffed. “Thirdly, she never calls, but mostly, get to the fuckin’ point.”

“If you had to die, how would you want it to happen?” she asked.

“I wouldn’t,” I said.

She guffawed. “I wouldn’t either, but say you had a death sentence and you were allowed to choose the method of execution?”

I scratched my beard. “…Quantum suicide experiment.”

“Congratulations!” she shouted inside my head.

I must have wanted to believe this. I must have wanted to be dead.

“Dan, I’m a little afraid,” she said.

“Cat, are you insinuating that the sort-of-near crash I had today was sufficient to be a quantum suicide experiment of any statistical significance?” I asked.

“Dan, first of all, what do you think the quantum suicide experiment is, and what would its success mean?” she asked.

I heard a bustle in my head room. Apparently, Bastet and I weren’t the only ones listening to this conversation, even though I was the only one having it.

“There are probabilistic outcomes in quantum mechanics,” I said, “and in small particle-to-particle interactions, these probabilistic outcomes cause superposition. That is, they lead to particles existing in seemingly mutually exclusive states, like traveling left and right at the same time. It’s thought by some that if someone were to play Russian roulette with a quantum random number generator, if the principle of superposition holds for large objects as well as microscopic ones, then surviving the game would always be superposed with dying due to it. So a person should be able to determine something about quantum ontology if they survive the game until their chances of survival are, say, one in a trillion.”

In my head, I heard a clamor go up in the gallery of extra-physical onlookers.

So, who are these people?

You’ve already met Bastet. As I said, I’m mostly certain she’s a figment of my imagination. That is, she is a loud, autonomous, and somewhat sarcastic figment of my imagination who refuses to acknowledge that I am about 20 years beyond the age for imaginary friends. They all do. Allah, Eris, Shiva, Anubis, (excuse me while I drop names,) Astarte, Lilith, and the rest of the host don’t ever seem to care that I have work in the morning. It doesn’t seem to bother them even that I’m almost positive they don’t exist. I’m new to it, but apparently, when you’re a paranoid schizophrenic, realizing all the holes in your inner voices’ stories and total lack of empirical evidence from repeatable tests to support the existence of an Astral Plane doesn’t make its denizens shut the hell up at four in the morning. Working to ground yourself in scientific study and earning a degree in physics doesn’t make them listen when you scream, “Shut the fuck up, and stop squatting in my brain!” aloud in the middle of a crowded train station or grocery store.

For argument’s sake, why would the gods care so much about me? They wouldn’t, but they claim it’s because I’m some sort of “singular dimensional crux” at a critical period in human history; I am crazy special. However, they seem to view this as more of a coincidence and accident rather than intrinsic to my character, and they’re probably right. I object to being crazy special, but they maintain a system of governance separate from human affairs, in my head, so I don’t get a say in the insanity.

“Mr. Strano,” came a voice in my head, “do you actually expect us to believe that your survival indicates the existence of multiple quantum worlds? What about the sample size, or any expectations for repeatability?”

I considered completely ignoring them, but I ventured that they might go away faster this time if I played along for at least a minute.

“Um, I don’t think a single sort-of-near-miss on the highway one day could reasonably be considered a statistically significant quantum suicide experiment,” I said, “especially if it wasn’t controlled to help establish the actual risk to mortality, so I guess, no, world politics should not turn on such a result, even if they’re Bizarro World politics.”

There was a murmur of disbelief.

“You don’t have the slightest idea what actually happened, do you, or why?” came the same voice.

“Nor do I give a shit,” I added. “I have no evidence of anything of empirical significance having happened recently, and I have work in the morning. Plus, it seems like you could do your pseudo-experiment and debate its contaminated results without any direct input from me, so the human singularity is going to sleep, now.”

Another voice came that nobody else could hear: “Dan, do you remember this document I hold here, that you refused to sign months ago?”

“The one right before I ended up in the hospital again?” I asked. “Thanks, by the way. I can’t even read your stupid imaginary documents.”

“It was written working directly from your native symbol set,” said another voice. “You could have at least understood the general meaning.”

“The Mormons would think that’s a perfectly reasonable explanation for why nothing ever reads the same way twice in the land of imagination,” I said, “but you wanted to grill me about sample sizes and repeatability of physics experiments.”

There was an uncomfortable shifting in the gallery.

Bastet sent out a tendril and grabbed the document that may as well have been the manifest of a cargo ship importing cheese.

“Dan,” she said, “let me paraphrase—”

“—Bullshit,” I said.

“Dan!” she said. “Let me summarize—”

“—Is this the document Al wanted me to sign,” I asked, “the one about the ontology for his nonexistent death-trap pseudo-world heaven with tremolo sound effects?”

“Do you mean Allah?” asked an onlooker.

“Yes, Dan,” hissed Bastet, “but it’s about 30 pages of inscrutable legalese, and we’re concerned with an addendum regarding a decision of our courts about a deferred penalty on you and what was to be done should you refuse to agree to Allah’s compromise.”

“Read it twice,” I told her, “I’ll get a pen and paper.”

“Dan!” she shouted, “This is exactly what got us to this point. You broke some major laws—in fact, even international treaties—with those psychic conversations you had with a couple of your friends—the ones they still acknowledge—and in attempting to repeat the experiences with them and others. You were allowed one such conversation, your ‘greater self,’ as you sometimes put it, was aware. You had three, and you attempted more—“

“—Right,” I said, “’cause, you know, I’m gonna base my world view on unrepeatable—“

“—Repeatability, Dan,” continued Bastet, “or an intentional dearth thereof, is exactly the crucial point here; you’re not actually supposed to have proof of us—no one is—and the vast majority of us on Earth aren’t even supposed to realize that each of us has a hard counterpart on the Astral.” She sighed even though she didn’t need to breath.

“You technically broke international law, Dan,” someone called out from the gallery.

“…Caused a global political incident…” said another.

“…And maybe committed a teensy-weensy baby bit of tweason,” said Bastet. “It was kind of a pwobwem, wemembew?”

“My God,” I said, “It’s a global conspiracy! Or a bullshit rationalization for why I couldn’t repeat three aberrant experiences upon which my subconscious bases compulsory belief in your existence,” I motioned to Bastet, “probably forever, now… and yours,” I motioned to the gallery, “…and you were there, and you!”

I fell immediately back on my pillow, eyes already shut.

“This is the point where we have a problem,” said Bastet to someone in the chamber-like convention on the Astral.

“…Because you can’t make fun of him any more?” asked a voice I recognized.

“…Because Russia just annexed Crimea, the oil is running out, some of Al’s factions think it’s the End of Days, and now he refuses to be the Messiah,” said Bastet.

“Are you sure?” asked the familiar voice of Shiva.

My hand shot up. “I refuse to be the Messiah,” I said. “How many times have I said since this shit storm first formed off the Pacific coast that messianic prophecies can’t work? The only thing that can save us is universal acceptance of each other and individual responsibility for world stewardship. How many of you share my sentiment that even the Son of Man basically thought the world community needed to realize its innate empowerment to save itself?”

“Most of the rational world agrees with you, Dan,” said Shiva, “but there’s this Christianity thing where about a couple billion people are expecting the return of a special someone to do this final judgment thing and usher in an era of eternal life and happiness for a select group, and this Judaism thing with a similar—“

“—codification,” I cut him off,” that’s implicitly designed to get adherents to question whether they’re the divine savior and ultimately produce the über-politician through self-fulfilling prophecy. But two big problems with that, is you produce at least a few hundred Waco Sieges first, dear Christ, and resource depletion and overpopulation don’t seem to have been anticipated by the prophecy’s engineers, so it won’t save the world anyway.”

Shiva chuckled. “You know, some of us believe in this reincarnation thing, and it might just turn out that a carpenter born in Bethlehem—”

“—Said virtually every Christian ever at some point in their life,” I said, “though most might deny it. But the carpenter would be smart enough to realize that it made virtually zero difference, wouldn’t he?”

“You don’t want a cult of adoring fans?” asked Shiva.

“I want a hole that’s dark, dry, and warm, and I want a loaf of whole wheat bread,” I said.

“How about a dark, wet, and warm hole?” asked Shiva.

“That’s the reason I’m in this situation in the first place, at the root of it all,” I said.

“Freud thought so, too,” said Shiva.

Bastet turned pink. “So the Messiah’s a misogynist, too?” she asked.

“I wasn’t blaming the hole!” I said.

“…And he’s a hipster,” said Shiva.

“…And he looks like he’s been smokin’ the reefa!” came a shout across the Astral.

“Yeah, boy!” came another. “Easter on 4/20 this year!”

I was up off the pillow again. “Wait, Easter is on 4/20 this year?”

There was laughter in the gallery.

“Why not check a calendar?” asked Bastet.

“I’m sure it is,” I said, falling back on the pillow.

“So you’re sure we’re right,” said Bastet, “but you don’t question how we knew that if you didn’t?”

“It’s about two weeks away,” I said, “I added fourteen to Sunday in a dream.”

“…And that would make today…?” prodded Bastet.

“…The fifth, since we’re after midnight,” I said.

“…At exactly 4:20,” added Shiva.

Bastet poked my brain. “Check your phone,” she said.

I grabbed my phone from the side of the bed.

“Who’s holding?” I asked

“You’re not surprised?” asked Bastet.

“I’m more surprised when your human counterparts make out of context comments that make for witty responses to what I’m thinking but don’t speak in physically spoken conversations,” I said, “but that’s a figment of my imagination or a lucky coincidence.”

Shiva added, “…Or maybe your insanity is just written clear across your blank face, 12 times a day.”

“So it’s enough to condition a response of faux ignorance on my part,” I said, “because if I press it, I’m going back to the bin, and I’m probably wrong, anyway.”

Shiva laughed. “Remember when Lilith’s incarnation hugged you randomly and said, ‘…The whole time?’”

“No,” I said, “I remember violating some random acquaintance’s space and mishearing them, albeit with no ill intent or sexual motivation on my part.”

Shiva snorted. “Freud would disagree,” he said.

Bastet slapped me with a tendril. “When did that happen?” she demanded.

“Excuse me!” came a shout from the gallery. “While I understand that you two know him personally and that Dan is obligated to maintain an appearance of mock disbelief in us all, we’re kind of in the middle of a crisis.”

The speaker approached me gingerly. “Dan, do you generally understand the situation we’re all in here?” she asked.

I groaned. ‘I can’t believe this,’ I thought. ‘I mean, it’ll kill me. But holding the existence of an Astral Plane anything at all like I imagine as an axiom, it follows that…’ I had to think about the implication.

Shiva cleared his throat chakra. “…It follows that you were put in an unfair situation that you couldn’t have possibly known about beforehand, where politicians attempted to legislate physical reality,” he said gently. “They asserted an identity on you that you believe at your core is false, called you an imitator in that identity you didn’t want to believe in, brought you to trial for it, sentenced you clandestinely to death, discovered a piece of physical law in the process that contradicted their religious beliefs, and then asked you to save them, without being willing to validate your sanity.”

“They can’t,” I said. “They probably don’t actually exist. I have no proof that they exist, and I don’t have any sane reason to suspect that I was sentenced to death via the quantum suicide experiment and survived.”

“Mm-hmm,” hummed Shiva.

I fidgeted. “What difference would it actually make to anyone that parallel quantum worlds exist, though?” I asked. “That doesn’t solve war, overpopulation, or scarcity.”

“No,” said Shiva, “but it disagrees with the publicly expressed world views of certain powerful Astral politicians claiming divinity, and it makes you look like Jesus.”

“Everybody looks like Jesus to me,” I muttered.

“Me, three,” said Bastet.

It hit me. “Wait, but when are you folks claiming I was put through the quantum suicide experiment?” I asked.

“It’s been going on gradually since you refused to sign the document outlining Al’s compromise and proceeded to flip him off in front of billions of people,” said Bastet. “It’s been so much fun waking up every morning not knowing if you’re still alive. Our best estimate is that you just tipped a five-sigma chance of survival, even though that isn’t a five-sigma result in conglomerate. But it caused a hub-bub.”

I grimaced. “See, that’s just fucking crazy,” I said. “I have exactly zero evidence to support that. How are you gonna tell this to me and expect me to react?”

“Allah is making a public statement about the situation,” said some imaginary politician that I really didn’t care to know. “Maybe you should all listen.”

I swung around slowly and got up out of bed like I was covered with weights. “I’d rather conduct a slow quantum suicide experiment of my own.” I thought, fumbling in the dark for my pants with a pouch of tobacco in the pocket. I didn’t feel well.

“Be you,” said Shiva.

The attention in the room in my head shifted to Allah’s statement on Astralvision, or whatever they call their broadcast systems, and I slipped out of the room. For the first time in a long time, I felt relaxed if not well, like I really was alone in the privacy of my own head for a moment, or at least surrounded by a couple of close friends.

“So there’s this requirement of repeatability in empiricism,” said Shiva. “Any idea how we could reliably repeat a result in evidence of many-worlds interpretation, bro?”

I opened the sliding back door and sat down like an elderly man on the steps outside. “Couldn’t tell you,” I said softly. “If I knew of an experiment to show it that didn’t rely on luck, I’d be writing a thesis on it.”

I mechanically rolled myself a conical, filterless cigarette and lit it.

“Dan,” said Shiva, “this really isn’t gonna do. Try to be happy, man. Get up and move. You’re gonna miss work tomorrow, but you got the hallucinatory voices generally on board with you today. It’s a turning point for you.”

“Is it?” I asked, smiling. “Tomorrow, the narrative is going to be completely different. This will have never happened, or it’ll become inconsequential in some contrived and nonsensical turn of events, and I might even scare or hurt someone if I actually believe it.”

I could hear Allah say something like, “We were wrong,” to much disappointment from the world in my head as if over a loud-speaker.

“Aw, brother,” said a trick of the light, or a benevolent god of destruction, “I don’t think you really have it in you to intentionally hurt anyone in a big way. You’ve been through this. You’re not gonna fly off the handle.”

I sighed.

“Dance for me, Dan,” said Shiva.

“Dance?” I asked.

“Put on a song and dance for the crowd,” he said.

I smirked. He was appealing to my daemon.

I scrolled through my phone and found Anamanaguchi’s “Akira.”

“Chiptune?” asked Shiva.

I hit play and hopped up.

“I am Tetsuo!” I shouted. No one would hear me.

“At least you’re not Jesus,” said Shiva.

“Nobody and everybody is,” I said.

I swung my hips, trying to ride the wave of the music and the night’s impossible excitement. I wanted to dance for a man who had been released from death row after over two decades when he had been there because of the color of his skin. I wanted to dance for a young girl who survived the explosion of a forgotten landmine in Afghanistan. I wanted to dance for the world, but in the quiet, dark hours of the morning on the steps of a million dollar home in one of the most affluent regions in the world, it felt disingenuous. I could only dance for myself, and my imaginary good fortune, and my real good fortune.

“That’s a pretty white dance, Dan,” said Shiva.

“It pains me to my core,” I replied, continuing to gyrate.

I heard a furor over whatever statement Al was making. I didn’t want to know what it was.

“Hey, Dan,” said Shiva, “ten…”

“Ten?” I responded, trying to keep rhythm.

“Nine,” said Shiva. I heard a plane in the distance.

“Eight,” he said. A roar went up from the world of my dreams.

“Seven,” we said together.

“Six,” I said, spinning on my left foot.

“Five,” said a host of the spirit. I clenched my teeth.

“Four,” I said, straining my balance. The crowd was quiet.

“Three,” Shiva said with me. The plane was getting closer.

“Two,” said Shiva in my head. ‘What for?’ I wondered, preparing for nothing.

“…One.”

I flinched. I could swear I heard someone physically speak that in the neighborhood.

The aircraft buzz-cut the house. I saw the narrow hull pass directly overhead. It looked like a drone, but it was dark.

“Repeatability, Dan,” said Shiva, “could be furnished by the quantum suicide experiment if you’re lucky. To remove human error, you might leave the whole process up to a quantum random number generator, autopilot, and an automatic release mechanism on a small explosive device. You’d be guaranteed success, but you’d end up living in a world that couldn’t figure out how you did it again.”

I hadn’t stopped dancing. “That device wasn’t actually rigged to do that,” I told myself.

“But they are actually spying on you,” said Shiva.

A cheer went up around the world, or nothing happened.

“Dan!” squeaked my delusional pseudo-girlfriend, “Dan, are you alive?”

“He’s alive, Kat,” said Shiva.

“I’m terrified, relieved, insane, and dreaming,” I said.

She gave me an Astral hug, which is like the better part of a physical hug without physical contact, or just really being too into a hug you’re imagining.

“What does the world do now, Dan?” asked Bastet.

“Don’t know; don’t care,” I said, dancing.

“If you were us,” she said, “and you knew that the world wasn’t going to admit a global conspiracy to Dan tomorrow, how would you stop him from throwing himself off a bridge?”

“…Math and vodka,” I said.

“Pay me a visit in Delaware sometime soon,” said a blue skinned idealization of my oldest friend, “and I will furnish both.”

Needless to say, I didn’t get any more sleep that night. Luckily, math and vodka were at hand, and I enjoyed a drink at sunrise.

My parents were home soon from visiting family overnight, and we talked for a bit. They could see I hadn’t slept, (I didn’t try to hide it,) and I told them the “voices” had been loud the previous night, but they seemed happy that I appeared to have some insight and wasn’t terrified or angry. At that point, if I believed the fantasy I was forced to watch contort and twitch out in my mind like a spasming muscle, I wouldn’t be angry. Very little gets me riled these days.

Of course, nothing of significance transpired. I took a day off, but beyond that, life continued as usual in its inexorable trudge to the day proof outweighs superstition in my fragile, political, demon haunted world.

I’ll welcome it with math and vodka.




Katie, You Are a Great Success
Nov 24 2014

I’m not the most socially connected human being on the face of the planet. At any particular point in my life since high school, I’ve tended to maintain one to three close, open, unconditional drinking-and-smoking relationships with other weather tossed pilgrims who also missed the boat for Moderate Success Island. That’s such a funny word, isn’t it? “Success…” It evokes a gut reaction without real criticality. It divides friends and marriages, an unplumbed gorge between those who think they don’t have it and those who can’t figure out what it is. There’s a magazine that claims it for its title, and it’s sold on the same rack as “Money” and “People.” It’s easy for me to wax cynical when I’m momentarily removed from my tightly knit social security blanket of three threads, though, when another Friday night has passed in lonely quietude and it starts to look like Saturday is going to be just as excruciating a reminder of how life isn’t going according to plan.

You know the story. You wake up, hungover from drinking alone, to find that you’re back in your parents’ house, that it wasn’t a paranoid fantasy that the graduate advisor you’d lined up months before the start of school tanked your career wrongfully at the word “go” on the basis of your first two meetings, that he’d decided you were, “…ultimately really only concerned with the trivia of interpretations of quantum mechanics and could never cut the math,” and you eventually cracked under the pressure and withdrew. You nearly fall out of bed, and when no one takes the resultant dull “thud” as an invitation to nag you about picking up your room, you realize your folks are probably gone for the day―because they have lives. You run to the bathroom, void thirty percent of the viable fluids you thought you had, stumble down into the kitchen and living area past what you’re seventy percent sure is cat vomit, rub your temples, turn on the television, and your ex-girlfriend is selling taxidermy on a cable reality show again. Then, Bastet the Ancient Egyptian cat god immediately starts in with you before your bagel and coffee―because of your chronic paranoid schizophrenia.

“Dan!” she screamed in my third ear. “Dan, you’re hallucinating!”

I groaned. ‘You couldn’t possibly be wrong, cat, if I’m “hearing” you,’ I thought at her.

She poked a purple astral wisp into my eye.

“…But you’re seeing me. You don’t usually see me on cable when I’m not really there―now, do you, huh? Huh?” Her whistling, little half lisp was absolutely piercing this morning.

I sighed. ‘No, I can’t say I do―not that I recall,’ I thought.

“I mean, even when you were drunk last night, and you turned on the TV to look for me―when I wasn’t there, because even the advertisement you read said it was scheduled now, but drunk people with Jesus complexes gloss over details and expect the universe to conspire to instantly gratify them―even then, you didn’t see me,” she said, “but your condition must be deteriorating.”

The part of my brain claimed by dragons in the last great war was producing words faster than the little piece I still lived in could process them.

“You just crammed more verbiage into that one sentence than our entire romantic relationship,” I said aloud.

She chuckled. “What do you think of the piece?” she asked.

I squinted at the screen. The show’s hosts were apparently haggling with the no-longer-requited-love-of-my-life over the mounted head and neck of what appeared to be an albino male deer. The hosts noted its ostensible rarity and admitted the craftsmanship of the taxidermy. It was beautiful, but I found it hard to focus on the piece.

I had never actually seen Katie without the counter culture embellishments obscuring the view. She had removed the eyebrow piercing. She wore no white powder on her naturally fair skin, or any makeup that I could tell. She didn’t need it. No black hair dye… the natural color of her long hair was more of a sandy blonde-to-brown, or just a tinge lighter than mine, all shine, no wave. (…Maybe a little wave, but not to her “ex.”) Cropping the taxidermy out of the scene and muting the conversation, nothing would have marked any connection with the image I had of her from years ago, except maybe the Converse sneakers she wore. She was just an unpretentious, waifish, naturally beautiful Mona Lisa in her own fashion that I was almost surprised to recognize.

Her doppelganger poked me again. “So, what do you think?” she asked.

I blinked. ‘She looks nothing like you,’ I thought.

Bastet snorted. “…of the mount!”

I squinted again. ‘What mount?’

“’That’s what she said,’” said my delusional “ex.”

I stared through the screen. Katie sold her piece for several hundred dollars. I pumped my fist. The scene changed to some spoiled dippy socialite approving the piece that had been procured on her behalf for a Christmas party. I turned off the television and sat there for about half a minute. It was quiet in the house, even in my head.

“Dan?” came a “voice” that was more church mouse than cat.

“Hm?” I thought.

She paused.

“Wanna be my stalker?”

I shivered, then took a deep breath.

“Nope,” I said aloud.

“Guh!” she said. “Fine!”

“…And I’m ending our Facebook friendship,” I added as I got up.

“You ended it last night!” she yelled. “I only ever accepted that request out of pity, anyway! You’re a lousy kisser and your poetry sucks!”

I judged that it was nearing sundown by the orange light in the foyer as I trudged up the stairs. I’m a vampire, without the fangs. I could sleep from sunrise to sunset.

“How many times did you look at my Facebook profile?!” Bastet demanded.

“…About half a dozen,” I thought truthfully.

“You were always selfish like that!” Bastet shouted in my head. “I guess Jesus is just too frickin’ important to stalk a girl right, who did everything for him.”

“Don’t call me that,” I thought at the top of the stairs.

“You deleted my number!” she shrieked. “Where are the desperate, drunk, four AM calls? The unrequested sexual photos? I don’t even get a three page text out of nowhere from you!”

I walked into my closet and grabbed a spiked dog collar from off my belt and tie hanger, putting it on with the buckle behind my neck.

“Well, there were those couple of rambling Facebook messages,” I offered.

I could feel her astral corpus about to explode.

“Those?!” she howled. “Dear gods, Dan―those were barely creepy! They might have even been slightly sweet! When I read that poem, I mean…”

‘What?’ I asked, putting on my own pair of battle hardened Converse high tops.

She shook her head and made an emphatic cross out motion with her arms. “Let’s just say―maybe―that the water color of the fox crying a giant black heart shaped tear that I posted the next day wasn’t a figment of your imagination.”

‘It probably was,’ I thought. ‘It was pretty, though.’

“Couldn’t you at least convince yourself that it absolutely had to be about you and fail to read between the lines that I still didn’t want to talk with you?!” She was laughing. “I have a career to think about! You’re not getting in the way of that!”

I examined my hooded sweatshirts for a minute, chin on hand. The lack of contempt was palpable. I finally reached for that one particular worn “hoodie” that I barely ever wore but could never quite bring myself to give up on.

She recoiled. “Ha! Ha-ha, Dan! You think wearing the hoodie I gave you seven years ago that you haven’t thrown out yet is gonna make up for this? That hoodie makes an appearance once a year at most. You’ve never even fetishized it! You washed it, for crying out loud!”

I was dressed for success. “I deserve a medal,” I said.

“You’re even cognizant of how a normal human being could be creeped out by what to anyone else would look like back patting for simply not completely succumbing to romantically obsessive insanity! What the fuck kind of paranoid schizophrenic ‘ex’ are you?”

I grabbed the bag I had loaded with writing supplies and a flashlight the night before and started down the stairs.

‘One who truly loves you,’ I thought.

“Okay! That’s a start!” she said. “Where are you going?”

‘To write sonnets in a graveyard,’ I thought.

“Better!” Her aura turned warm purple. “Are they for me?” she asked.

I walked through the front door and locked it behind me.

‘It probably wouldn’t be appropriate to send them to you at this point,’ I thought.

She made a noise like she was about to vomit. “Dan, there’s no hope for you,” she said.

“You’re right,” I said aloud, as I started down the walkway.

October was over. It had turned into a pumpkin and rotted with the first frost. Barely a tree held a stubborn, clinging leaf, and I was the only spook still roaming the streets in search of something sweet. The graveyard wasn’t far. I almost wished it was farther, though, because I could fool myself sometimes into thinking that the length of a trek correlated with the meaning in it. A quarter mile down the road, Bastet’s presence still clung to me like a wet miasma, but she hadn’t said anything.

‘What is it?’ I thought at her.

“Why do you love me?” She asked.

‘When I laid bare my insanity to you, you were the only person who made fun of it in a way that implied that you still credited me some fair measures of intelligence and insight, both in the flesh and on the astral,’ I thought, ‘so I consider you the kindest person in the world.’

She emitted one of her characteristic impish giggles. “That’s flattering. What if I maybe believed your ‘delusion’ could have a kernel of truth to it?”

‘You as flesh, or as dubious but witty idealization?’ I wondered.

“She’s like my appendage,” said Bastet. “Any ‘lower’ is like an arm with a mind of its own.”

‘The “mind of its own” part was the reason I was asking,’ I thought.

“…Kind of like a penis, I imagine,” she added.

‘Mine reads physics textbooks and H. P. Lovecraft all weekend,’ I thought.

She blew through my synapses like the wind in the trees. It was getting dark, but it wasn’t much farther.

“How was I kind?” she asked.

‘You were the only one besides my parents and the oppressive theocratic astral regime who visited me in the hospital,” I said. “You brought me stuffed animals and graphic novels.”

“Uh-huh,” said Bastet. “I remember, I gave you ‘Johnny the Homicidal Maniac’ to read.”

“That’s what I mean,” I said. No one else was on the road to overhear. “You seemed perfectly content to have a boyfriend who thought there was a global conspiracy to cover up the fact that he was having psychic conversations, and who thought he had other magical powers―who thought you were a god.”

“Dan,” she whistled through the piles of leaves, “you were smart and sweet, at your worst. You were obviously schizo’, but I felt safe with you, somehow.”

I walked up the drive of the graveyard. It wasn’t as venerable as some of the others around the area, but it was big and mostly secluded from the major roads. Walking between the rows of polished stones, the ground felt like it could give way underneath. The Jersey pink and purple sunset hues were dying, the last bright gasp shining through the bare trees.

Bastet giggled. “Maybe it wasn’t obvious, that you were schizo’. Maybe it really is a gigantic cover up, and you’re some kind of singularity. Maybe you took on ‘God’ and mostly got away with it.”

“…But with basically nothing accomplished,” I said, “out of my original goals of starting bloodless uprisings on the physical and astral planes.”

My phone vibrated: it was a text from my buddy Dave. I started typing a response.

“You have my ear,” said Bastet.

“That’s what I’m here for,” I said, putting away the phone and taking out paper and a pencil from my bag.

“…and a creepy hoodie,” she added.

I rolled my eyes and started counting syllables of the first line I was trying to write.

“Wanna talk with her?” asked Bastet.

‘You mean your lower, on the astral?’ I thought, scribbling a line. ‘It doesn’t work that way.’

“You’re not the boss of me,” she said. “She’s my meat-puppet dick-with-a-brain.”

I nearly had a second line. There were times I wished she’d take a hint.

“She could be thinking of you right now,” Bastet whispered. “She could be masturbating to you. You could be her guilty pleasure.”

I counted syllables for a minute before I responded.

“She could be calling me up to go get a cup of coffee if she really felt that way,” I said, “instead of sending her shadow to crack dick jokes while I’m trying to write her poetry.”

“Guh!” said Bastet. “Fine! I’m sure she isn’t enjoying it.”

She acted like she was stomping off, which is obviously theatrical when you can teleport at will. It was a sure sign that she actually wanted another sonnet. The gods are relatively predictable. Most of them are usually appreciative of art undertaken in their honor, but they don’t fall all over themselves to let you know. In my experience as a straight male, human women tend to be the opposite: some tend to make big displays about how they want poetry from a guy, but it’s rare that they really think through what that entails or appreciate the result the way they idealize it. I know guys must be essentially similar, but my own limited direct experience is with women, by accident of nature. Katie probably felt similarly, when she gave me an anatomically correct sculpture of a heart in a black coffin shaped box. I loved it, and it’s still hidden away in the attic somewhere with the other preserved organs and skeletons, but I was dealing with the onset of “life changes” during our relationship, and I had difficulty expressing any emotion clearly to anyone.

Bastet must have determined to try to contain herself just long enough for me to finish a first stanza before breaking into soft shoe, because no sooner had I rhymed “need” with “seed” than I heard a voice from beyond.

“Dan!” said Bastet. “I found a dead thing that isn’t buried!”

“Where?!” I shouted. “I wanna see!”

I could feel her attention flit about the graveyard like a searchlight. “Oh! Where was it?” she asked.

She took off fast down the rows of stone faced monuments, and I chased her. She hopped blithely over mounded earth and polished marble―the dead couldn’t care. She stopped suddenly at the heart of the yard and looked around. I came up on her tail and nearly fell over trying to brake. I was practically in her space. She drifted into mine.

“I think it was here,” she said.

I looked around. “I don’t see it,” I said.

“You wouldn’t,” she replied.

I shivered. “Why wouldn’t I?” I asked.

“It’s me,” she said.

“It’s you?” I reflected.

“That’s right. It’s you,” she said.

The graveyard was the least frightening part to me. “Are we supposed to pretend to make out or something, now?” I asked.

“Just pretend to hug me,” she said.

I thought of a girl who broke up with me in antiquity, shuddered, rolled my eyes, looked around, then put my arms out in a loose circle. That’s when the car came roaring up the graveyard access road.

I tried to act nonchalant. The car came as close as it could, and the windows opened.

“Are you some kind of necromancer-philiac?” asked Chrissy.

I chuckled. “I am the summonér of nothing in particular,” I said.

Dave grimaced. “You know, the line is―“

“It was an awesome line, the way I said it, Dave!” I shouted.

Chrissy cackled and pointed fingers. “You shut your mouth, Dave!”

The driver snickered. “I’m happy you two are my friends. Seriously, though, Dan, what were you doing?”

I gaped and stammered. “I… I… You texted me like twenty minutes… I thought―when you say you’re coming, usually…”

They both gave me cool, superior looks. They knew about my “illness” already. They knew a few other things about me, as well, but somehow they still kept coming around, and I loved them for it. Bastet had stealthily oozed away, and I loved her for it.

“Just get in the car quick,” said Dave. I stalled for a minute to grab my bag, and then we got out of there like it was a graveyard haunted by a schizophrenic stalker.

“Dude,” said Chrissy, “what is it like when you’re talking with people who aren’t there?”

I could barely hear her over Failure playing on the megawatt sound system. “They’re generally better conversationalists than most people,” I yelled, “but you folks are exceptions.” We all laughed.

I leaned into the front bench. “Folks, I realize how strange that was,” I said. “Please call me out on bizarre behavior if you ever feel uncomfortable or I don’t seem to be self aware, but if I didn’t indulge ‘the voices’ often enough, they’d demand my attention in ways I couldn’t parse.”

“Dan, I don’t feel uncomfortable,” said Dave. “You never get out of hand or anything.”

“Who were you hugging, though?” asked Chrissy.

“I was hugging a five-thousand-year-old Egyptian cat deity,” I said, “who I know isn’t there, on my better days, but that doesn’t stop her from yapping constantly in my ear.”

Bastet pinched my spine. She’s never out of earshot.

“What’s she like?” asked Chrissy.

“She’s too human to worship―like they all are―but she’s exceedingly kind, for all her sarcasm,” I said. “She’s sort of a protector personality.”

“So long as she’s kind,” said Chrissy.

“Hey, where are we going tonight?” I asked.

“QKI’s,” Dave said. “I couldn’t get you on the list, though. You have money for the cover?”

I felt for my wallet and pulled it out. “Yeah, I’m all good,” I said.

“Great,” said Dave. “We’re meeting a friend of mine, there. She’s single and cute.”

What a segue. “Oh?” I said.

“I might have told her I was bringing my poet-physicist friend along,” said Dave.

“I’ll try not to talk to myself in front of her,” I said. “Thank you, but why do that?”

Dave shrugged. “Sometimes it’s just nice to help connect friends, and it seems like you might both be having trouble finding someone at the moment. Her name’s ‘Katie.’”

The obligatory moment of misplaced hope in impossible accidents flared and burned itself immediately into exhaustion.

“It’s not me,” whispered Bastet.

‘Any idea what she’s like, though?’ I thought.

“Huge pair of personalities, probably,” said Bastet,

‘What makes you say that?’ I wondered.

“Your luck,” she said.

I managed to hear “the voices” clearly enough over the blaring car stereo to channel them into another stanza of poetry before we arrived in Newark. We parked in a half empty lot, and Dave got a flask out of the trunk for us before we headed over to the club, because nobody actually gets drunk in the bar. That would require a steady full time job to fund, the kind which might instead support a shared living arrangement with a significant other. Some of us had significant others to consider, and some of us didn’t have steady full time jobs.

When Katie broke up with me, she didn’t say why. I didn’t ask her. She had started to cry as soon as the first words came out of her mouth, and I didn’t want to make things any harder, and it just seemed natural. She was an intelligent, creative girl who wasn’t in a position to support someone whose life had become a shambles. I stopped her, and I said it was okay and I understood. We hugged, and that was that.

Dave’s name was on the list at the club, and Chrissy and I were satisfied to pay for the change of pace. A remix of a song by Depeche Mode was playing as we entered. We got drinks, and we sat down in a booth. We joked about how “white” the dancing was, and Dave lambasted the DJ. Dave and I went for cigarettes, and Chrissy stood outside with us. He got pulled into conversations here and there while Chrissy and I talked about whiskey and music. When Dave found us again, we went to the bar for a second round. About the time we were served, we noticed an argument break out at the door, which Dave went over to while Chrissy and I seated ourselves back at a booth.

Bastet poked a feeler in from behind. “That’s her, Dan, at the entrance,” she said.

I looked over, but I could only see Dave and the bouncer through the door. ‘Does she have a huge pair of personalities?’ I asked her in my head.

“I take it back,” said Bastet. “Sometimes karma trumps luck.”

‘Well, is she intelligent?’ I wondered.

“Her brain is skinny and wrinkle free, at least,” said Bastet.

Dave and the other Katie came in with the cold. She wasn’t unpleasant to look at, I supposed, with long jet black hair, green eyes, white powder complexion, and copious latex and piercings. Some of us accept and even like latex and piercings, but something wasn’t quite right, about the delay at the door.

“I told them I knew you!” she said to Dave as they approached our booth. “I mean, how do they expect me to pay? …To get into this club? If I weren’t for me, they wouldn’t even have a DJ tonight―you know?”

“Katie,” said Dave, shooting me a smile that made me nervous, “this is Dan, the physicist-poet I was telling you about earlier.”

I stood up and started to offer a hand.

“Oh, well, hello,” she said, brushing past my hand for a hug that left me feeling slightly violated. “…But everyone calls me ‘Kitty.’”

“I take offense at that,” said a voice no one but me could hear.

“Kitty” winked. “They say I have the personality of a cat.”

“She licks herself,” said Bastet.

“You’re a physicist?” asked Kitty. “What’s that like? Maybe you could teach some of the guys I know a thing or two about the equations of motion, you think?”

“Bad pussy!” said the cat god.

I twitched, but I think I passed it off as an earthquake.

“I hate how Dave does that,” I said as we sat. “It’s flattering, but I’m not working in the field. I’m kind of in between careers, at the moment.”

“He’s also vegan,” Dave chimed. “I don’t know how he does it, but didn’t you say you were considering vegetarianism or veganism, Katie?”

Kitty nodded. “Considering,” she said, “but after a lot of soul searching and research, I think veganism might actually be socially irresponsible, in its own way. I read an article that pointed out that more animals are killed in the grain and vegetable farming operations necessary to support the diet, but they say that you are what you eat.”

My smile didn’t crack. No one but Bastet saw my head explode and reassemble itself in the course of those two sentences.

‘Think she ate a stupid cow?’ I asked Bastet.

“Mostly just penis,” said the cat god.

“Well, my reasons are rather more about sustainability than animal rights in particular,” I said, trying to tuck-and-roll past the argument about basing your worldview on one or two bad internet articles you find through social media.

“There are health reasons, too, though!” Kitty continued. “I hear it’s great for weight loss. I’ve considered it to try take some weight off my breasts, because they’re causing back problems for me and I’d rather do anything less invasive than reduction surgery, you know?”

“Huge kindness…” said the other Katie.

I gaped. I couldn’t help it. The other two of us at the table fidgeted.

“Do you think I could be sexy with small breasts?” she asked, fluttering her false lashes. “I mean, can brains carry a girl?”

“Weapons of mass deduction…” chirped Bastet.

Chrissy looked at me and smirked.

“I guess you should do what’s best for your health,” I said. I pretended only Bastet could see me cringe.

“Yeah,” she said, “I guess it’s like a guy and his dick. I’ve known some guys that were, well, huge, and it just makes all the difference in their confidence.”

“Tube sock full of bologna…” Bastet quipped.

It was happening: I was cracking again. I had hallucinated this conversation from the start, I couldn’t quite convince myself. How could I be the only one starting to laugh?

“Oh, but you find this funny,” she said with a predatory smile. “I wanted to shoot a video with my last boyfriend―you know―but he was too self conscious, and I think he started using a penis pump or something when I broke up with him.”

“’Pressure Treated Lumber’ on DVD…” said Bastet.

I couldn’t help the laughter, but I trained my eyes dead on hers. (I admit I sometimes scrunch up my face and try to project back in time on the astral plane to see the looks on the faces of Chrissy and Dave right then.)

“Would you ever be up for something like that?” she asked me. Her gaze turned intense and sultry. “I don’t use condoms, though,” she added.
I stopped laughing.

“Bring a coat hanger,” whispered the real Katie.

That did it. I reached for my drink and just barely managed to shoot it without choking. I pounded the table with the other hand and leaned over it.

“Dear Christ, I love you!” I said to nothing in particular.

Katie who doesn’t use condoms didn’t like that. Immediately, her face turned lurid and she was up from the table.

“Dave, your friend is fucking creepy,” she said. “I have to go. I said I’d meet another friend in New York, and you know what traffic is like, anyway.”

“Bumper-to-bumper…” said the good witch of the north.

Dave got up and chased after her. Chrissy closed her eyes and laughed deeply and wistfully.

“I think I need another drink,” she said, getting up to walk over to the bar.

I couldn’t take it. I tried to put a boulder on my laughter to crush it, but it sprayed out of every orifice. I made wild snorting noises like a buck or a bull. I flailed and gasped for air.

“Three hours ago, I was calling you the kindest person I’d ever met,” I said, still wracked by spasms of laughter.

“Dan―Dan, calm down,” she said in a lisping little whisper as I tried to comply. “I want you to listen very closely to me: if you can’t allow yourself a little laughter at the expense of someone who mostly deserves it, you will die.”

I started laughing even harder. I felt light headed. I saw amoebic spots before my eyes.

“Dan!” she whispered. “If you don’t at least make yourself that allowance, you will be pulverized under the weight of your fantasy.”

I stopped laughing, like someone had suddenly reached over and violently shaken me. In the next instant, I felt a hot, wet pressure behind my eyes.

“I will not let that happen,” she said.

Dave came up behind me and playfully slapped my back.

“Dan!” he said. “You alright, man?”

“Rather, you will not let you do that to yourself,” said Bastet.

Chrissy was close behind Dave, with three drinks in hand. She finished one in front of us as she stood. Dave smiled and reached out a hand toward one of the other shots expectantly. She glared at him and swallowed that one, too.

“Dave!” she yelled. “What were you thinking?!”

Dave’s shoulders fell. He patted me on the back.

“Man, she’s bat shit, but she’s hot,” he said. “I know it’s been a while for you, Dan, what with the illness and all. Maybe that’s all you get, sometimes.”
I thought I knew what he meant. In any case, no one had lost an appendage.

“Man, can we go home, soon?,” I asked him.

Chrissy looked at me with an expression I read pity in, and then she looked at the third shot. She tilted it back in one good swig.

Sooner or perhaps later, when Dave had sobered sufficiently to drive, we packed it in. Chrissy fell asleep in the front seat of the car while I finished the third stanza in the back. The couplet emerged somewhere around the point I trudged up the walk to my folks’ front door:

    So long, so many ways we said “farewell”
    to orchards left in trusting, given seed
    in parks between a crimson carousel
    and one more queue for something you don’t need.
    Why circumscribe the pencil point for’er?
    Why mourn an ocean’s passing with the tide?
    The perfect model of systemic er’r
    consuming expectation, I confide
    in her, the kindest of my waking dreams
    who gently scoops my cotton insides out,
    renews the matted filling, heals the seams
    upon my eyes, and draws me close about.
    I picked a rocking horse to take the crown.
    I bet my hand, then all the cards fell down.

“Success” is a funny word. It’s nearly lost on me. I don’t think Katie was thinking of it, either, when she broke up with me, or when she decided not to respond to my couple of attempts to reach out to her again. I hated that word in high school and my early adult life―like everyone was supposed to be on TV, make piles of money, and start a nuclear family. One can’t be a burden on the people who love them, though. There’s more to life than pretty words and searing feelings. I think of all the people I know chasing that ill defined dream, though, and all the uncritical assumptions about it that people seem to make. I would love to one day rise to the highest proverbial mountaintop and stake Katie’s banner in it in gratitude, to hold her arcane countenance up to humanity as the greatest “success” I know and as a model for my own, but from there it’s on the rest of the world to make the connection.

I don’t know if Katie will ever read the poem, but Bastet seems to like it.




Psycho-Christ Versus the Bad Mama Twins in the Rolling Holiday Battle Cage
Jan 03 2015

“It’s settled, then,” said the bearded one at the head of the table. “We obviously can’t have you running around, psychotic, trying to start some sort of ridiculous pseudo-religious uprising, but I think we’re basically convinced that you’re not likely to end up in the state you did a few years ago anytime soon, again—do you agree?”

Of course, it was purely paranoia, but I could swear they’d tightened a few screws on the restraining mechanism, pierced manifold through my psychic biology, specifically for the occasion. I couldn’t get the overwhelming scent of orange out of my elbows, but my elbows were about six meters away, anyway, between the nape of my neck and my ears.

I tried to locate my vocal apparatus, to respond. “I guess, if I’m supposed to believe that a majority of the world doesn’t want to own up to the universally known fact of their hard astral counterparts while incarnate—if I’m supposed to believe that in this room—” I said, “but I’m supposedly epistemologically incapable of knowing this in any other context, but you’re just going to tighten the thumbscrews whenever I naturally provide some evidence to the contrary, but nobody—”

“Dan!” said the smartly-dressed woman to his right. “You’re not helping your case. We get it. You’re not going to give up the ghost on that one—no pun intended.” (I’m sure she’d intended the pun.) “What we’re trying to determine, primarily, is whether you’re a danger to yourself or anyone at this point. I suppose you’re free to foot-notate every day-to-day interaction with the possibility of a conspiracy—I think many functional schizophrenics do, honestly—so long as you have sufficient insight to parse those suspicions as unreal, or perhaps somehow differently real, and as nothing on which you need to act in violence, as we think you’ve demonstrated.”

She adjusted her suit jacket. “Additionally, we can’t have you jumping in front of traffic or walking into open campfires at the behest of ‘the voices,'” she added. “It is our opinion, though, after observing your behavior to some level of scrutiny, that you currently mark a clear delineation between what we’ll call ‘this’ world and ‘that.'”

I would have grimaced if I could feel my face. “I find it ironic that ‘that’ world’s requirements for my behavior are so similar to ‘this’ world’s.”

“Perhaps it’s fortunate,” she said. “So, again, tell us what your plans are for the coming year, Daniel.”

Visions of eight tiny reindeer roasting on an open fire danced through my head. I said, “If my parents are still willing to host me and the heavenly host, as they say they are, I guess I’m going to find a full-time job, pay back my debts, and try to just stay out of the bin.”

The room nodded in approval.

“Then there’s just one more thing, Daniel,” said the well-dressed woman. “I have a personal request.”

I didn’t want to hear whatever it was, but I was a captive. “What’s that?” I asked.

She closed her eyes, removed her glasses, and put her hands to her temples. “Daniel…” she started.

She took a pause too long for comfort. I wanted to squirm.

“Yes?” I responded.

She opened her eyes to glare. “Every year at Christmas, I see you in the same chewed-up jeans, shoes like a twelve-year-old, and that ratty Lars Frederiksen t-shirt.”

“Annie…” said the bearded one.

“No, John, let me speak!” she cut him off with a sweep of her hand.

“Every year at Christmas at my aunt’s, you wear the same freakin’ threadbare clothes and scummy shoes you’ve been wearing since high school—and I can’t take it anymore!”

The rest of the room groaned.

A squeak issued from my left side. Bastet offered, “Eris, that really isn’t the point of this—”

“You shaddup, you overgrown housecat enabler!” said the god of strife.

The feeling of having my shoulder blades wrapped around my feet, despite being discernibly illusory, was becoming nearly as uncomfortable as the lecture.

I tried to locate either of my middle fingers, but failed. “Um, Mom—”

“You listen to me, first!” she declared. “I am sick of—every year—battling with you on Christmas morning to get you to shave and wear something besides those goddamn clown shoes—and white socks! Then, you make us late to get on the road for my aunt’s—you and your no-good brother—and I can’t take it this year!”

“Eris,” said one of the representatives, “this is an official proceeding—”

“I, don’t, care!” frothed my mother. “He’s fucking old enough to wear a decent pair of pants and a sweater! This is why he doesn’t have a girlfriend!”

“I thought it was the chronic schizophrenia and my overbearing mother,” I said, as I felt my spine twist into a pretzel.

Bastet gaped. “Annie, are you actually turning up the juice on the soul cage—as you air your dirty laundry in front of a damned federal legislature?!”

Only Hera’s mastery of the indignant Italian mother routine exceeded Eris’.

“He’d do it if he loved me!” she whined.

Bastet’s characteristic purple aura turned red.

“That’s a military-grade cage!” she shouted.

I could no longer feel if I had limbs, much less feel where they were. I think I started to have a panic attack.

“Dad…” I squealed.

The bearded one looked at me with some redeemable note of sympathy, then at his consort.

“Dan, she’s right,” he said.

The Ancient Egyptian principle of truth and balance slapped her forehead and exchanged incredulous looks with Bastet.

“Alright, two things,” said Maat, looking at my parents’ evil twins. “First, we’re about to go into recess. This is the last order of business: Dan’s not a danger to anyone, and we need to stop treating him like he is. Issues of his particular existential condition left aside, allowing experimentation into that pressing scientific concern we’ve talked about without him, he deserves a relatively normal human life. Anyone say ‘Nay’?”

No one said anything. Maat looked around.

“Okay, Dan, you made parole, so to speak,” said Maat, “so we’re officially in recess. Secondly, it’s now criminal for you to do this to him, without preregistration of intent with the Council toward a particular end, you sick fucks,” she said to my parents’ doppelgangers. “Take off the cage or you’re each going in one.”

Immediately, my spine mostly uncoiled. The panic stopped. I could form sentences. My elbows were still in the next room, though.

“Are there any permanent effects from that thing?” I asked.

“Yes,” said Maat, “but you mostly deserve it. Wear a decent shirt to Christmas.”

“…And shoes!” added Eris.

“…And shoes,” said Maat. “Everyone enjoy the year’s end.”

In my head I heard a gavel hit a block, and back on planet Earth I heard my mother shout from her bedroom.

“Merry Christmas, everyone! Get the fuck up, take a shower, shave, put on some decent clothing, and get in the car!”

The disorientation of waking somewhere unexpected was offset by the familiarity of waking up with a slight hangover.

I have a dream like this once every couple of years, but the politics don’t stop when I wake up. That is, I know I’m dreaming the Council proceedings, but I’m holding off on saying whether they’re “real,” still. As a paranoid schizophrenic, sometimes the subjective difference between dreams and waking life boils down to a strong cup of coffee.

There was a knock on my door. I groaned.

My dad opened it—John Strano, not Bizarro-World Dad who’d supported my mother in leveraging a military-grade restraint and torture device against my usual choice of wardrobe a minute ago. At least, I’m willing to concede in my better moments that the man is probably unaware of the actions of the legend. The man would have likely maintained as well that I deserved it, though.

“Merry Christmas,” he said. “We gotta get going. Get in the shower, and we’ll take breakfast on the road.”

I tried to say “Merry Christmas” back, but the way I gurgled it probably sounded more like “Murder Christians.”

“I made coffee,” he added, as he turned to my brother’s door opposite mine. He knocked, and brother Christian screamed.

I rolled out of bed and stumbled down the stairs, eyes slits, and started my routine. I don’t remember pouring coffee, but when I came to I was in my coat with a cup in one hand and a rolled cigarette in the other on the back stairs outside the house. I tried to pretend that the sensation like my arms were on backward and my head wasn’t properly attached to my body were the after effects of magical torture, but deep down I knew it really was probably caused by the neuroleptics or the illness they were supposed to treat. One way or the other, I’ll hold that my politics are a bigger motivator of the semi-compulsory antipsychotic regimen, while billions of people believe an omnipotent deity was born this day.

“Merry Christmas,” said Bastet, making me jump.

‘You’re still there?’ I thought at her. ‘Happy Yule.’

“Happy Yule,” she said. “Whadya get me?”

‘This,’ I thought, raising a middle finger.

“Is that all?” she asked.

‘Actually, I got you two,’ I thought.

“Where’s the other?” she asked.

I raised the index finger on the same hand. For a moment, both worlds were silent.

“That’s a neat magic trick, Dan,” she said.

‘I also do Bar Mitzvahs,’ I thought.

“How does it feel to be a free man?” she asked.

‘Was that real?’ I wondered. ‘Sometimes I can’t tell which dreams are prophetic from which are just fulfillments of freakish wishes.’

“Do you truly believe that you’re having a conversation with an Ancient Egyptian cat deity at the moment?” she asked.

‘No offense,’ I thought, ‘but most signs probably point to “no.”‘

“Then let’s just move forward as if the gods apologized to you,” she said, “for the constant verbal abuse leading to sleepless nights and holidays in the hospital and stuff.”

‘I guess some schizophrenics suspect the world of secretly plotting to make them happy, at times,’ I thought.

“Do you accept?” she asked.

I took the last swig of my coffee and last drag of my cigarette. Years of training had honed my timing to the point of unconsciousness.

I said aloud, “Yeah, well, I guess it’s Christmas and shit—”

There was a quick rap on the sliding glass door behind me, and my father opened it, as I nearly tumbled down the stairs.

“Dan, we gotta get moving,” he said.

‘Like my bowels,’ I thought. “Alright, alright, I’m done.” I replied.

My mother shouted from the kitchen, “Wear one of the shirts we got you, and don’t you dare wear those stupid sneakers, like you’re freakin’ twelve years old! I’m warning you!”

I shuddered. “Merry fuckin’ Christmas to you, too, Mom!” I yelled.

“Merry Christmas!” she shouted back with a giggle.

“Wait—he’s not done yet,” said my younger brother, shimmying past my father onto the back steps.

“Oh… smoking buddies?” asked my father.

We both nodded.

“Oh,” said Dad. “Hurry up, the two of you.” He shut the door and headed off toward the kitchen.

“Merry Christmas,” I said to brother Christian.

“Merry Christmas,” he responded, pulling a menthol from its box.

“I’m quitting for New Year’s,” I said.

“Yeah, me too,” he said, and we both laughed.

“It’s tough with the psychosis,” I said. “It seems to help with the symptoms, sometimes.”

“I completely understand,” he said, lighting his cigarette. “If nothing else, it helps you cope with the stress.”

“How’ve you been feeling?” I asked. He’d come in from Boston, and I hadn’t seen him in months.

“Good,” he said. “My doctor has me on one of the newer meds. It’s worlds better than the other stuff, for me. You should really look into it. You’re on one from the previous generation.”

I leaned back against the railing. “Yeah, maybe,” I said. “I kind of like my ‘whisper-it-all.'”

Christian guffawed. “Some of the drug names are so stupid, they’re hard to take seriously,” he said.

“It beats ‘end-it-all,” I said.

He laughed. “Who’d name a drug that?” he asked.

“It probably has something to do with the organic chemistry,” I said.

I looked down at my feet. “You know, I don’t totally trust the meds, Chris.”

“Why not?” he asked.

I said, “The mind isn’t the product of a few signaling chemicals dispersing along the concentration gradient. It’s entirely physical, but it’s computational. It’s literally programmable, in the sense of a Turing state.”

“Wait, what do you mean?” asked Chris.

“Changing the chemical balance of the brain seems to me sometimes like trying to debug software by tuning the voltages of electrical components in a computer. Changing chemical balance could still be therapeutic, but that’s not the root of all mental illness, so just taking a pill can sometimes only do so much.”

“Oh, but cigarettes help with the symptoms sometimes, right?” Christian shook his head. “So why not therapy, then?”

“Oh, therapy is great,” I said, “sometimes. The drugs are helpful sometimes, as well. There’s certain kinds of ‘therapy’ that can only come from self-introspection, which therapists encourage, but they’re tied to a pathological reality condition as I am.”

Christian said, “I have no idea what you’re talking about, Dan, except for the part about brains as computers.”

The sliding glass door opened without a knock, this time, when my bladder would have appreciated the warning.

“Guys,” said Dad, “let’s go!”

“Alright, alright,” I said, “I’m hoppin’ in the shower, now.”

I headed up to the shower and turned the hot water up to nearly full blast, like I always do, and watched my skin turn flush red before soaping and shampooing. I reminisced about playing with jumper pins on the motherboard of one of our old PCs when I’d wanted to “improve” it. One good little static shock could do in an exposed machine in. As I toweled off, I couldn’t help thinking about how I used to swallow cough medicine by the bottle.

“Wear those,” said Bastet, as I rooted through my pants drawer.

‘Why those?’ I wondered.

“They accentuate your junk,” she said.

I recoiled at my own sick mind. ‘This is a family affair,’ I thought.

“Oh, am I invited?” she asked.

‘Sure,’ I thought, ‘It’s not like I have any control over what you do.’

“How about my boyfriend?” she added.

“She’s never going to stop doing that, Dan.” said the deification of strife. “Tell her ‘no’ and see what happens.”

“How do you know it isn’t him?” Bastet retorted.

“Is it?” asked my evil stepmother.

I had already picked a (loose) pair of pants and a sweater. I started to put them on, both legs of the pants at once.

‘At this point, it’s not like I expect her to suddenly come running in the flesh one day because I hallucinated a particularly flirtatious conversation with her, Ma,’ I thought. ‘Of all my myriad god complexes, though, it seems like she consistently defends me—against you.’

“‘A drunkard’s dream if I ever did see one…'” said Eris.

‘The boozer doesn’t fall far from the tree,’ I replied.

“You’re wearing that?” asked my mother’s revenge.

“Dan! We’re late!” shouted my dad from the hall.

“You both might have some fuzzy idealized vision of how I could look,” I muttered quietly as I put on my shoes, “but, in reality, it doesn’t even matter what I wear.”

I bounded down the stairs, but stopped short when the All-Knowing Earth Mother sucker-punched me with that look.

“Oh, you’re wearing that?” she asked.

“Tell me to get the fuck in car,” I said, and we got the fuck in the car.

“Do we have the food?” Mom asked, once we were seated.

“We have the food,” said Dad.

“…The gifts?” she asked.

“We have the gifts,” he said.

“…Cats taken care of?” she asked.

“Annie, can we get on the frickin’ road already?” he said.

“Don’t start with me, John!” she warned.

“Annie, the kids already made us late!” he said.

“The kids” exchanged looks and rolled their eyes.

“Are the cats taken care of, John?!” my mother practically screamed.

“Yes! The damn cats are taken care of!” he shouted.

As he put the car into “drive,” Chris and I both started laughing, which was unforgivable. Mom immediately turned around to share the Christmas cheer.

“Listen, you two rat fink bastards,” said the incarnation of sarcasm, “I’m warning you—I’ll kill ya dead—”

I snorted and Christian gaped at the point she said “bastards.”

“Mom,” said Chris, “you do realize—”

“—I know what I said, you sonuvabitch!” she yelled. “Listen!“

We were quiet, all of a sudden.

Mom raised an unassailable finger. “I do not want to hear one peep about how the party takes too long and you want to go home, or how you’re tired all day because we got on the road too early, or how you’re a general misanthrope and you can’t stand to be around the family for eight hours. You’re adults, we’re driving you, nobody made you come, and you’re perfectly capable of socializing politely—with a smile—for one goddamn day. Am I clear?”

“What’s clear,” I said, “is that the immediate family is somehow obligated to become your emotional punching bag every year at Christmas because you don’t know what to do with your anxiety about the holiday but project its origin.”

“I’m not an emotional punching bag,” said my father.

“I’m sorry,” I said, “then I’ll just speak for how I feel, but I’ve heard the same undeserved polemic every Christmas morning for the past sixteen years, when none of us started on the war path except Mom.”

“John,” shouted Mom, “do you see what they do? Why can’t we just have a pleasant Christmas for once?!”

“I know, Annie, every year…” he said.

“Okay, we haven’t done anything yet,” said Christian.

“Am I nuts,” I asked, “or is she the one who started with a sour attitude on the offensive?”

“Well you are nuts,” said John. “…The two of you, actually.”

Christian looked over at me. “That was supposed to make us laugh,” he said.

“Jesus fucking Christ, I know,” I said.

“Daniel,” said my mother, “every year, you come to my aunt’s and complain— ‘There’s no vegan food for me,’ ‘I can’t stand being with the family,’ ‘You made me come,’—“

“I never once, in nearly thirty years, complained about Angie’s impeccable hospitality or the food,” I countered. “In fact, I’ve never said any of that, but you worry that’s what I’m thinking—when it isn’t—and you become indignant about your own projection, because it gives you an explicit immediate conflict to stress over where you have the moral high ground, and I’m sick of you burning me in effigy! You need to find a better way to cope with your stress over the holiday!”

My father had to ask, “Daniel, did you take your medication today?”

I bit my lip and looked out the window for the next quarter minute.

“Daniel, I asked you a question,” he insisted.

“I heard your question, and I understand your actual reasons for asking it better than you do,” I smouldered.

“What are my ‘actual reasons’?” he asked.

“It’s your trump card to invalidate anything I think or feel that you don’t like—like you attribute every adult decision I’ve made in my life that you don’t agree with to some involuntary, senseless manifestation of mental illness.”

“I’m just asking you whether you took your medicine,” he said.

“Dan,” said my mother, “I think your father is just trying to express concern for your health, in his slightly insensitive way.”

“All you folks ever really care about is my health,” I said, “like when you lied to the cops, saying I threatened you, to have me hospitalized.”

“Daniel!” she shouted, “You needed to be hospitalized! There was no way around it! You weren’t well, and you weren’t staying in our house like that!”

“We told the police what happened to the best of our memory,” said my father.

“It’s funny that I remember those nights better then you,” I said, “even what the so-called ‘voices’ screamed in my ear, but you can’t even remember the words to Grateful Dead songs you’ve been singing for forty years.”

“Dan—” my father started.

“—John…” was all my mother said, shaking her head.

Her super-powered alter ego wasn’t quite as reticent. “Every single Christmas, Daniel…” said Eris.

‘I guess I could just eat shit instead,’ I thought. ‘Shit’s vegan, right?’

“What did I do to deserve this?” she asked.

‘You or her?’ I wondered. ‘She’s not having this conversation. She didn’t take every opportunity to practically hold me down to try to break and retrain my identity and opinions.’

“So you hold your mother responsible for that?” she pressed.

‘What I was saying is rather that I have to hold you responsible only for your actions and her only for hers,’ I “said.”

“…Like the supposedly baseless hospitalizations?” she asked. “…The chemical ‘mind-control’? …The ‘pathologization’ of the decisions of yours she doesn’t agree with?”

I fidgeted in my seat. ‘I know what you’re trying to do, Eris. You want me to double-down on my parental baggage? Do you get off scot-free when the lines get a little blurry and I call her by your name?’

Bastet pinched my ear. “Dan, don’t even play into her,” she said.

‘“Dad” is conspicuously quiet,’ I noticed.

“He’s driving,” said Eris.

‘Right, sure,’ I thought. ‘“God” can’t walk and chew gum at the same time, even when I’m actually the one chewing the gum.’

“He doesn’t want to talk with you,” said Eris. “All you two ever do is fight. Change your attitude.”

‘You’d do it for me, if you could,’ I thought.

“Stick the knife right there, Dan,” she said. “You would, if you could ever prove these wonderful little ‘family meetings’ weren’t a product of mental illness.”

The real Annie Strano shifted and cleared her throat.

It was like I’d been struck. I grappled with this chronic feeling I get, like I have to parse two proven ideas that are impossibly at odds with each other.

“I don’t know what I do to deserve this,” said my mother. “I’m always a ‘bad mother,’ somehow. Whatever I do, it’s not up to standard, and the same for your father. We’re human, Daniel. So are you.”

“…Except, you’re not,” said Eris, “and neither are we.”

“Shut up, Eris,” I muttered unconsciously.

“Oh, now I’m ‘Eros’ again,” said my mother.

“Right, I’m ‘Allah,’” said my Dad.

I let my head and eyes fall back and stared at the roof of the car. For some reason, it was particularly frustrating to me that Annie never understood the difference between the (ostensibly male) god of sexual love and the Great Hag presiding universally over strife—or “chaos,” in her modern cult—when I had pointed out the difference to her several times, in a number of different contexts, because it’s a particularly embarrassing thing to have your mother running around telling everyone on the block when the truth of the matter might be marginally less Oedipal.

“I thought her grandfather was Eros, in this incarnation,” whispered Bastet.

‘You’ll have to excuse her,’ I tried to explain. ‘We’re a family of inbred pagans.’

“I take offense at that,” said the Holy Father.

Eris and “Al” got a kick out of that. Honestly, so did I.

“What’s funny?” asked my mother. She sounded more worried than angry.

“Folks,” I said, “the secret identity thing is admittedly ridiculous, but I can’t help it. Your doppelgangers never shut up, even with the meds, but even I’ll admit, it’s basically impossible that Rome and Judea formed some sort of clandestine alliance by marriage, reincarnated over thousands of years into the people in this very car.”

“But that’s just what we want you to think,” said Eris.

I twitched.

“Daniel,” said my father, “I’ll ask you again: are you taking your meds?”

“I swear to any god besides those two that, yes, I am on a totally regular medication schedule,” I said.

“Do you need to up your dose?” asked my father.

“Folks, I’m frustrated because so many family arguments turn into something you think you can fix by forcing me to take more medication that just stones me into being less likely to want to point out your neurotic tendencies,” I said. “You both came into this car ready to blow over your own holiday stress. Christian and I got a lecture because Mom’s boiling over about showing the right face to her family, taking charge of the party, and not being able to puppeteer the behavior of her children as an extension of her identity, feeling generally out of control like she does every year. Dad, you’re the road warrior, because she’s almost literally not even capable of driving on a highway, and ultimately it’s just easier to give the “kid” a pill than somehow miraculously part the Red Sea of traffic so Mom will stop flipping out—just one iota less. I’ll admit it was weird that I accidentally just called Mom ‘Eris,’ but it wouldn’t mean we’re all coping with our stress healthfully just because I didn’t stand up for myself when you folks take it out on me and Chris wrongfully!”

“It was weird that you called me ‘Eros,’ Dan,” said my mother.

My eyes bulged. ‘It’s weird how little your counterpart really knows about how I actually think, ‘Eros,’” I thought at Eris.

“It was fucking creepy,” said Christian.

“I have to admit that you seem perfectly coherent, though,” she added, “but I want to see you take your medication when we get home, and you talk with your doctor about this.”

“Sure thing, Mom…” I said.

‘…But I’m gonna make damn sure you hear, since she never listens,’ I beamed at the mothership, ‘that your control issues stemming from your relationship with your parents, especially your mother, has led you to demand a totally inappropriate level over control over my mental health and its maintenance, and if I wasn’t facing violence in my previous living situation, and if the economy wasn’t crap, I’d never tolerate what you demand of me in exchange for a violence-free home and food.’

“I’m sure it was all part of our plan,” said Eris.

“Dan is right,” said Chris, “that we really didn’t do anything to deserve that lecture, Mom.”

“Alright, can we call this fight over and try to have a happy holiday?” asked Mom.

“Wait,” said Chris, “there’s something else I want to clear up. Dan, I was the one who said you threatened Mom and Dad that night.”

It got quiet in the car. I was measuring my response.

Mom beat me to the punch. She said, “Daniel, we love you, but you have an illness.”

“We were worried about you, Daniel,” said my father.

I sighed. “Worry isn’t an excuse to take control of another person’s brain function away from them, though, folks.”

“Who took control of your brain away from you?” asked John.

“We did,” said Eris.

“My treatment plan should be between me and my doctor,” I said, “but you folks have to dictate it. You do the same for other members of the family. Including me, practically everyone you’re close to—Mom’s mother, Dad’s brother, and Christian—all carry diagnostic labels that you folks petitioned for, and leaned on us to have applied, and leverage in familial disagreements about lifestyle, but you folks don’t seek therapy or answer to anyone for your, well—frankly, Mom, for your debilitating anxiety and self-image problems, fixated on food, that play into your general neurotic need for control over your family life, that’s a legacy of my grandparents’ home life, and your shared codependency, folks.”

“Codependency?!” shouted my father. “Annie, are we codependent?”

“No, John,” said Mom. “We might be slight control freaks—not in the way he wants to make it out—”

“—But it keeps us thin and the house spotless!” said Dad.

“Exactly!” said Mom. “…But I’m not thin. Oh, I can’t even think about the food at the party. We’re going on a diet, January first.”

“Aren’t we already on a diet?” asked my father.

“But I gained weight!” said my mother.

“That tends to happen, when you weight train multiple times daily,” I said.

“That’s a lie,” said my mother.

“She’d seek treatment for clucking like a chicken and growing feathers, Dan,” said my father, “but she wants the eggs.”

“Right,” I said, “so, about your stewardship of my mental health…”

Mom exclaimed, “Daniel! All of this is besides the point!” (It wasn’t besides the point in the least.) “I know when my son is sick! Don’t you tell me that I can’t tell the difference between when my son is sick and when my son is my son!”

“Does your son get a say in it?” I asked.

“No!” shouted the entire car.

“So, who’s worse?” asked Eris.

I had to just sigh, again. There really was no hope.

“I love you folks,” I said aloud.

“We love you, too, Dan,” said my mother.

I spent the rest of the car ride thinking about power struggles waged for control of my own head with my pseudo- and human parents, and the night I’d been hospitalized for “threatening” them. I had managed to win over public opinion in my head against them, for a moment, and my “god parents” had histrionically called for knives in their chests, with no more literal intent than Eris just had in calling for the same during that holiday morning car trip, and I took it no more sincerely than I believed my mother thought I was a “rat fink bastard son of a bitch.” I was so incensed, though, I exclaimed how, “You’re lucky I don’t, with the way you’ll treat your own son, but I’ll never stop loving you!”

In reality, we’d been fighting for days, about things besides and including psychiatric medication, but that twisted, broken, and inscrutable proclamation of love had come “out of nowhere,” in the middle of the night. Trying to shift perspectives, allowing for imperfect human knowledge, I’ll still hold that people’s paternal pity is misguided at times. I was walking to a friend’s house, to remove myself from a toxicity that invariably pulled me back, when the cops stopped me. They found out I’d studied physics, and at their (transparent, yet probably somewhat earnest) request I gave them a fifteen minute explanation of special relativity that I still think was one of my better ones. One of the officers was disappointed to hear that I think SETI has ruled out intelligent alien life in a large neighborhood of Earth, but I tried to assure him that most physicists think it’s likely to be out there, somewhere. It didn’t stop them from claiming legal right to have me hospitalized.

I imagine it’s tough being part of a political family during the holidays, based on my hours in the simulator. People judge your family, and it’s based on the stupidest criteria. They judge your religion and sect, or lack thereof. They judge the food you eat—how much it costs and to whom you give the leftovers. They judge what the kids wear and whether they’re “well-behaved”—at probably the most stressful time of year for most of us, when you’re in inescapably close quarters with the expectations of spirit and unconditional good-will, on a day of the year that simply must shine like a beacon of light and love in the season of death and illness—by ancient intention, days marked at the natural nadir of light.

We went over the river and through the woods without further incident, to the home of my mother’s aunt, who might or might not be the pagan deity Hestia. There, my family ate a traditional feast of seven fishes, possibly secretly discussing political plans for the next session of Earth’s highest astral legislature with the Judeo-Christian-Islamic god himself, or not.

If anybody wonders where Jesus fits into this delusion, I’m pretty sure he’s my cousins’ dog.




Daniel in the Lions’ Den
Jan 27 2015

It takes you a day just to recover from emergency and intake, because you’re reminded that you’re basically still in the dark ages of psychiatric medicine every time they strip you down to your boxers and a hospital gown, put a printed plastic bracelet on your arm with your name and a bar code on it like you’re a damaged canister of mixed nuts that’s just missing a label and 2 filberts in the grocery story nobody wants to shop at—but we can still sell those nuts, man—put you in a room with 4 beige walls to perfectly complement the beige ceiling and the wavy-patterned linoleum beige floor tiles, with a camera over the television from 1987 that they never acknowledge is obviously a fucking camera, when you learned DOS before you had pubes, and you just opted in the lobby not to sign the release to share the video with other institutions, and then they tell you to try to get some sleep but leave floodlights on in the room through the whole night—but at least you brought a fucking soft-cover book this time!

Then they send the crisis counselor in, and he tries to get you to put down the book. Years ago, I brought a copy of Bohm’s Quantum Theory in with me, having clutched at it like a snot-covered security blanket in a moment of life-changing insight, making myself as inseparable from it as a sensitive child going through problems at home. Years later, I brought a quantum field theory text in, and the crisis counselor—the very same counselor from so many years ago—warned me that, “You should give up that stuff, man. You’ll fry your brain trying to understand it.” Man, I hate to tell you, but I’ve been over that mountain, got a degree, passed a graduate level course in the subject, coded a simulation with applied semi-classical gravity fields, and got three T-shirts, but all I brought you back is this freaking exasperated tone.

When he gives up, and when you’re too exhausted to read, you might as well start talking to yourself freely, because it’s the best conversation you’re gonna have for a week or two. Pretend the whole ward knows exactly what you’re talking about—fuck it, the whole hospital! Pretend the gods themselves are throwing you a “welcome back” party right then—or “good riddance,” as the case may be. You’re not going anywhere for half a month, because you just got there, and it’s safe to assume you’re there for an excellent reason, whether you talk to yourself or not—so indulge. Tap dance with the fucking stars, you gorgeous, unfathomable beast.

The doctor comes in when you’re finally approaching the point of falling asleep despite the lights and removal of all things familiar and “you.” People ask why I have these tattoos on my wrists, and I tell them they mark the completion of two epochs in my life—which they do—but I don’t tell them they’re there to remind me who I really am in the emergency psych ward. The doctor comes in, her face blank, her manner hurried, and she barks half a dozen questions at you. She has to ask you three times about your level of education because, you don’t stutter, but the answer disagrees with her assumptions. She walks out of there as soon as her liability is minimized. You can finally sleep, then, because you’re just relieved that you know exactly what the next few weeks ahead of you have in store—after the first time, at least.

So it always takes me a day to recover, after they wake me up for the ambulance to the in-patient facility, and wrap me up on the gurney like a babe in swaddling clothes, and wheel me down to Limbo.

My parents dropped off some clothes and toiletries, but I dreaded talking with them. I changed into something comfortable to sleep in, trying to feel appreciative for that, at least, when I knew a lot of folks in the ward wouldn’t even have a second pair of underwear.

I laid down on the worn mattress, and I just listened to the voices in the center room that all the bedrooms adjoined, for a little. You overhear conversations in the ward to which you tend to feel like a familiar party even when you don’t know anyone, snippets about getting high, patients coming and going, and admonitions to demons for manipulating innocent Christians’ thoughts. I don’t even want to tell you what the demons say back.

As I started to drift away from what I’ll call “normal waking consciousness,” I heard the only “voice” I was currently on speaking terms with.

“Awe you fawwing asweep?” asked my “fwiend.”

“Trying to,” I said aloud.

“You usuawwy don’t wike to tawk to me awoud, though,” she said.

“There’s no reason to keep it quiet, tonight,” I said.

“Want me to wead you a bedtime stowy?” she asked.

“Bastet, please cut the fake speech impediment,” I said, rolling over.

“Why?” she asked.

“‘Cause you’re five thousand years too old for a lisp,” I said.

“Nuh-uh,” said Bastet, “fiwst, I’m going to teww you a stowy—and technicawwy it’s a wotacism, not a wisp.”

“…A what?” I asked.

“…A wotacism!” Said Bastet.

“…A ‘lotacism’?” I guessed. “…A ‘rotacism’?”

“Forget it,” said Bastet. “Just listen as you fall asleep.”

I pulled the covers close and shut my eyes.

Bastet tickled the back of my neck. “There once was a boy—or man-boy, really—who wanted to grow up to save the world, like so many near-virgins who play too many video games and watch dirty Japanese cartoons.”

“Thanks,” I said.

“You’re welcome,” she replied. “He wanted to save the world, because he knew that exponential population growth, unchecked carbon emissions, reliance on non-renewable energy sources, and a condition of mutual assured nuclear destruction could not be maintained indefinitely.”

“You’re not making it easy to sleep,” I said.

“He knew that the chosen path of a majority of human beings was unsustainable,” she said, “’…But if I master the power of magic,’ he thought, ‘then maybe being able to shoot five magic missiles in a single cast will somehow help me reverse global warming!”

“I hate you,” I said, even though I was laughing.

“He read medieval and modern grimoires,” she said, “and started hanging out with a bunch of dodgy characters, like demons, and people who called themselves ‘mages’, and he drank a bunch of cough syrup whenever he needed to refill his mana meter.”

“What magical effect did the pot have?” I asked.

“…Made you impotent,” said Bastet, “and he had sex with a bunch of hookers and killed them to get his money back before driving around the city in a stolen car while being chased by the national guard. No, that didn’t happen, but he did meet a hooker, in my estimation, and she wasn’t very nice, but he convinced himself he loved her, for no clear reason given her lack of redeeming qualities that I can see, and he hallucinated psychic conversations with her about various depraved topics for a few months until even he got sick of her. He drank a lot, and wanked a bunched of angry wanks to try to get her out of his system, which never worked, and somehow the gods of various religions got pulled into this debacle of an unhealthy, one-sided relationship between her and him, because they expected him to either start a revolution out of sheer sexual frustration or possibly try to do something drastic, like ruin their Sunday brunch—and the girl was supposed to be his soulmate or some crap, they said, even though he doesn’t believe in that, or any of this bullshit I’m describing.”

“I don’t believe in this conversation, even,” I said, “but somehow I feel guilty because you called her a hooker with no redeeming qualities.”

“The girl fucked with his head, and gave him an inferiority complex, and left him a pretty messed-up shell of a boyfriend by the time I got to him,” said my “guardian angel,” “but kinda sexy in a bad-boy way that he’ll never quite recapture.”

“Then, what happened?” I asked.

“The gods were very angry at him,” said Bastet, “and they called him names, and said mean things to him like, ‘Dude, you fucking ruined brunch for everyone forever—way to go,’ and so they had to have a trial for him, and they sentenced him to have his soul split in billions of pieces and distributed to the people of the world to control his every thought and action, because it turned out that he was some sort of dimensional singularity that the gods could exploit as a resource. He maintained that the whole deal was bullshit, and he demonstrated repeatedly to us that we couldn’t control him, and he eventually got bored and went off to get a degree in physics while we pretended to channel the stuff of his soul into evil magic and snort it during wild hate sex with our ‘ex’s that never happened. Oh, and many of the gods and angels and demons and dryads and shit were actually the alter-egos of other people living on planet Earth—where he did not live at the time—whom it seemed like he could speak with psychically.”

“Tell me about all the times your incarnation dressed up in furry costumes and tried to snort my soul,” I said.

“Then the cat god told him to fuck off,” said the cat god.

I felt her aura envelop me like a hug. “…And that’s what Groundhog’s Day is all about, Jimmy Spooner,” she said.

“I remember a fox costume,” I said.

“…And that’s after trillions of dollars may or may not have been invested in trying to make you forget, while keeping you viable as a fuel source and a political diversion. I suppose you win the universe, Dan,” she said.

“What’s my prize?” I asked.

“I think you already know,” she said.

“Medication time!” came a shout from the center room.

They put me be back on my old meds, but the hospital could never risk the temptation to up the dose. It was just easier, I suppose, for everyone but me. It’d help me fall asleep, at least, right then.

I slept til lunch. I woke up, avoided all eye contact, ate soggy under salted green beans for lack of options without animal flesh, secretions, or ova in them, and slept til they woke me up for visitors.

I decided that if it was my parents they woke me up for, I was walking away. To my moderate wonder, though, I scanned the crowded cafeteria to find two of my closest friends from high school. Adam had brought a chess set with him. Jake was fiddling with his phone.

“What are you folks doing here?” I asked.

“What does it look like?” asked Adam. “I thought we’d both be up for a rematch.”

“…And I just like picking up women in mental hospitals,” said Jake.

Adam and I laughed. “That’s my line,” I said.

“Crazier, the better, right?” said Adam, chuckling.

“I find it correlates with the willingness to perpetrate unspeakable acts in bed,” Jake said.

“Until you start getting fifty calls a day from her,” said Adam.

We all started to laugh, but then the two of them looked at each other uncomfortably and stifled.

“Dude,” I said, “the truth is, anyone who’s been at this for a minute has experienced more ‘crazy’ in an afternoon than you will in your entire life, and they don’t want any more. They’ll never call you back.”

That got a hammy laugh from Adam. Jake smiled.

I tilted my head back and sighed. I said, “Man, it’s good to see you folks here instead of my parents.”

“How you feeling, brother?” asked Adam.

“Dude,” I said, “to be honest, I don’t know if I’m wired or exhausted, I can’t have a smoke or a cup of coffee, and an Ancient Egyptian cat deity with a speech impediment keeps cracking jokes about the Apocalypse that nobody but me can hear.”

“I can hear her!” I could swear I heard someone shout at the next table. I was relieved when Adam and Justin turned their heads to look, too.

“I don’t know that person,” I whispered.

Adam cackled. “…But you and she appear to have a friend in common!”

I tried to shake out the willies. Jake was still looking over, jaw hanging slightly.

I looked him straight in his face. “Bro’, that’s your chance!” I said.

Jake kept staring. My friend’s friend, looking older than my mother, with magenta hair, winked at Jake.

Jake slapped the table with both hands. “Dudes,” he said, “I’m done.”

“We gotta play this game first,” said Adam.

“Set it up quick,” I said, “before everybody else’s demons get a chance to know mine.”

We set up the board, and my first new friend in the hospital looked away. Jake tried not to let on that he was looking back that direction. I thought about a particular conversation Jake and I had years ago, under the influence of a moderate amount of marijuana, in which we both verbally came to agree that verbal communication had apparently become unnecessary to convey our minds. I wondered, as I considered my first move, if Jake was more taken aback by our new friend’s cavalier attitude and charm, or her purported familiarity with Bastet.

Adam beat me, of course. I could make excuses, about not being in my right mind, or about being distracted by all the psychic conversations I kept getting pulled into, but he usually beats me.

When they left, I slept til nearly dinner. I awoke to the feeling of someone staring at me who probably wasn’t there.

“What do you want?” I asked no one in particular.

“I want you to give up this suicide mission and just try to get some quality out of life, finally. You’re not doing anyone any favors,” said the One God of Too Many Religions, “especially yourself.”

“You say that like I really have other options,” I talked back to “God.”

“You do!” he shouted. “The problems you’re convinced you’re going to fix are too big for you! You’re only going against the democratic will of the people, anyway! You don’t own the world.”

“Of course, because you own it,” I said. “You’re gonna suck every last drop of oil out of the Earth, to keep your constituencies happy, and when you’ve built your own private Idaho of a ‘paradise,’ you’re gonna set the people who believe in you to kill each other over who gets to join you in it, and you’ll ultimately eugenically hand-pick your final kingdom.”

“How do you figure?!” he demanded.

“I don’t trust any belief system that holds that there’s an ultimate expiration date on Earth,” I said. “Wasn’t that what we were fighting about, when you put me in here?”

“You were fighting with your parents about things they don’t have the slightest idea about—and you don’t, either,” he huffed. “They—we don’t deserve this.”

“Of course I don’t understand,” I said. “I’m just a backwater yokel to the folks on your plane. You, on the other hand, are a powerful charismatic dictator who likes to tell people how they’re allowed to screw.”

“You know that’s not my will,” said ‘Al.’ “I can’t micromanage every action undertaken in my name—it’d defeat the purpose.”

“Your will is whatever appeals to the person to whom you’re speaking,” I said. “It’s kind of amazing how you can maintain so many dogmas at odds with each other and still convince their adherents that theirs is the only true one, without drawing scrutiny to your faithfulness. You’re just a wheedling politician, ultimately, and you’ll act like it’s righteous when you get to pick which of your rich friends and obedient token sheep get to board the new ark.”

“There could very readily be a place in Heaven for everyone, including you, if you just do what you know in your heart is right,” he said.

“Get bent!” I shouted.

“Just go to dinner,” he said.

I did as I was commanded, but it won’t make any difference when the Rapture comes. They were opening up the doors to the cafeteria when I left my room, and I got in line for food with the rest of the damned.

The person behind me was singing spirituals. Ahead of me was the magenta-haired woman with whom I apparently shared a delusion.

“Michael, row the boat ashore. Halle-luuu-jah…” said the one behind me.

“She hasn’t stopped singing that for three fucking days,” said someone farther up in line.

“You should sing with me,” said the woman behind me. “Jesus is the only way anyone’s getting out of this place, you’d best realize. His Second Coming is upon us!”

“Lady, if Jesus were alive today, he’d end up in Greystone, and you’d never hear about it,” said the person farther up.

My friend’s magenta-haired friend and I chuckled.

“Even if he was in the hospital, He’d save us, praise Him!” said Our Lady of Tactless Piety.

She tilted her head back and raised her arms. “Jesus, I know You can hear me!” she cried. “Deliver me from the wicked and set my soul free, Jesus! Michael, row the boat ashore…”

“I’ll set her soul free,” grumbled the person up ahead.

The one behind me started clapping. “Halle-luuu-jah…”

The face of the one ahead suddenly darkened, and his fists clenched. He started to stomp back to the singer, but the woman ahead of me with the magenta hair got in front of him, to my relief.

“Hey, we all need a crutch,” she said to him. “You’re next in line, anyway.” She pointed to the space in front of the food cart that had opened up.

He bit his lip and turned around to walk up.

The rest of us at the tail end of the line filtered into the cafeteria and got our food. Someone must have told them I was vegan, because they had an option for me this time, with salad and chickpeas. When I got my meal, I looked around for a seat, and I noticed the magenta-haired woman was sitting alone.

I walked up to her table and said, “That was very cool of you a minute ago, to step in-between those two. Do you mind if I sit with you?”

She looked up at me and said, “It wasn’t anything. Sure, pull up a chair!”

I flipped the nearest unoccupied chair around to her table.

As I sat down, I was surprised to notice a commonality in our food. “Are you vegan, too?” I asked.

She looked at me with solemn, analytical eyes. “It’s a family tradition. My mother was a Hindu priestess, and my father was an Algonquin shaman.”

I tried to express my respect in my face. I said, “Oh… That’s very…”

Her gaze turned impish and light. “I’m messing with ya,” she said. “I don’t even know who my parents are. I noticed the last time I was in here that you folks get better food—something fresh.” She chuckled.

I had to laugh. “Hey, I can’t deny that fresh veggies are better than the dry eggs and oily meat,” I said.

I put down my fork and offered a hand. “I’m Daniel,” I said.

She looked at my hand, then put down her utensil to accept it. “Tara,” she said. “Pleasure.”

We picked our forks back up and each took another mouthful of salad.

“That’s a heavy biblical name,” she said. “No wonder you’re in here.”

I sighed. “Yeah, maybe it helped give me a god complex or two,” I said.

She smiled. “You’re in the lions’ den, Daniel. I’ll bet you told a king something he didn’t wanna hear.”

“It’s kinda funny,” I replied, “but I tend to think that’s the real reason most of us are in here.”

“I know exactly what you mean, brother!” she said.

We both busied ourselves with eating. I was curious about before, with what she’d said during visiting hours, but it’s the sort of thing you learn not to ask about after a couple of stays in the “bin.” With a question like that, there’s the chance of disappointment with the answer, but it’s sometimes worse when you get the answer you thought you wanted to hear.

I returned to my room and conked out for the night. I missed the evening “leisure” therapy activity (karaoke or the like) and the after-dinner snack—gosh, golly.

When I woke, I’m not sure if Bastet was waiting to talk with me or if I had reached a blind, sluggish astral feeler in her direction, like a hand searching for an alarm clock, or a prayer for coffee.

“…No coffee or cigarettes for at least a week, Dan,” she said.

I kicked at the covers and put my pillow over my head.

“Find me a connection,” I said.

“I don’t hang out with dealers,” said Bastet.

“What good is a familiar if she isn’t familiar with the local apothecaries?” I asked.

“Excuse me!” she said. “Don’t talk to me like I’m your servant! I have entire armies at my disposal!”

“Ohmagawd!” I said, “…thousands of Legion!”

“My territory holdings on the astral are among the richest in this world!” she insisted.

“…Vast, fertile tracts of land!” I mused.

She can’t exactly kick me, but she can “zap” me in such a way as to elicit a pretty violent twitch when she feels like it, it seems.

“Where’s a goetic demon when you need a dealer?” I wondered.

“…Often closer than you think,” said a third voice.

I flinched. “Is he with you?” I asked Bastet.

“What would you give me for a smoke and a cup of Joe, Dan?” asked the third.

“Well, he hasn’t got a soul or anything like that,” said Bastet.

“Yeah, she snorted the last of it during hate sex with her ‘ex,’” I said. I twitched violently.

“I’m not interested in a soul or anything like that,” said the third.

“Who is this guy?” I asked Bastet again.

“Um, maybe he’s not such a nice dude, I’m thinking,” said Bastet.

“Is he someone to worry about?” I wondered.

“Um… Maybe a little, yes,” she said.

“You’re worried about him?” I asked.

“…Yes,” said the commander of thousands of Legion.

It got uncomfortably quiet in my head, for a minute.

“Don’t worry about me,” I assured Bastet. ‘I don’t have a soul to sell, anyway.’

“He said he isn’t after a soul,” said Bastet.

“I’m a fan,” said the interloper. “I just want to see you keep doing what you’re doing.”

I laid in bed for another couple of minutes, unsettled by the lack of sophomoric name-calling in my head for a change, and then a nurse came in to take morning vitals. Breakfast would be in about fifteen minutes, she told me. I stared quietly at the ceiling, trying to ignore screaming in the hall.

They summoned us, and we shambled into line for breakfast, stoned into ox-like amiability by the meds. A couple of people threatened to sue to no one in particular. Nobody wants to be here. None of the patients think it helps. All you can do is eat mindlessly.

I sat down with my purportedly vegan pancakes and melon and grieved the absence of smoke and bitterness. Tara came over and sat down without a word or eye contact.

We each took a couple of bites of breakfast. Finally, she looked up.

“Something dark is following you today, Daniel,” she said. “Keep yourself pure. Don’t descend into hate.”

“I suppose that’s good advice, in general,” I said. “I think it’s just the lack of coffee that makes me look like I want to kill someone, though.”

“Ha!” she said. “So that’s it.”

We each took another bite of our short stacks.

“What are you in for?” she asked me.

I barely heard the question, as my nerves suddenly reported contortion and dismemberment besides all evidence to the contrary. My eyes bulged, but I tried to hold it together. I put my face in my hands.

“My parents told the cops I threatened them, which isn’t true,” I said.

I needed to move, but I only allowed myself to wiggle my toes.

“They think anything is justified in having me hospitalized when they decide I’m unwell,” I added.

Tara gave me a worried look. “Are you okay?”

“No, honestly,” I said as I bounced my heels, out of instinct. “It feels like I have to move and all my body parts are mapped on wrong.”

“That’s the meds,” she said. “‘Akathisia,’ I think they call it.”

“Not sure,” I said, fidgeting into a dozen different postures to try to find the least bizarre-feeling. “They just upped my dose, but I thought it happened when you start a new med.”

“What does it feel like?” she asked.

“…Velvet friction-burn and intense guilt,” I said, “and like my torso is inside-out—I don’t know.”

“Maybe it’s the war-machine sucking the last drops of your soul out,” said an unfamiliar voice I thought I’d left back in my room.

Tara said, “They might give you something for that.”

“I don’t think I want any more meds at the moment,” I said, squirming. “Sometimes, they’re worse than the illness.”

Tara sighed. “I wish I could shoulder some of the weight of your cross, Daniel,” she said.

We both took another mouthful of breakfast, as I swiveled my feet on their balls.

“You’re right, though,” she added.

I managed to hide the side-effects from the staff at breakfast. I skipped morning therapy again to study my quantum field theory text. I knew my parents would come to visit today, and the last thing I needed before that was therapy.

By lunch, the akathisia—or whatever it was—had become severe. I sat with Tara again, and I think we were both happy as middle schoolers to not have to sit alone in the cafeteria, but I wasn’t much for conversation.

“This kind of stoning is really so much more humane than what they did in the Bible, isn’t it, Dan?” said a voice coming from a dark and squalid place. “Too bad you have the wrong delusion. You could convert, you know.”

“Michael, row the boat ashore…” proclaimed the poor woman with too much of the right delusion.

“Faith is wasted on the faithful,” muttered Tara.

We both chuckled as I bounced and swiveled on the balls of my feet.

There was little I could do to either concentrate or relax between lunch and visiting hours. As I tossed on my dilapidated mattress, I almost wished I honestly believed in a benevolent “higher-power,” but not to the point of rejecting the balance of evidence.

“Do you love your parents?” asked Bastet.

“I’ll never stop loving them,” I said. “I wish they’d understand why I think certain expressions of their protectiveness are toxic and part of their neuroses, though.”

“How do you maintain this wall between thinking of them as your human, forgivably ignorant parents,” asked the least welcome of “voices,” “and the falsely deified tyrants of a five thousand year dynasty?”

“…Usually with off-label psychotropics, believe it or not,” I said.

“Oh, I believe it,” said the “Dark Lord,” himself.

There was a knock at my door. “You have visitors, Daniel,” said a voice on the other side.

It felt like I tumbled down the hall, the vector of gravity’s pull flailing every which direction, but averaging to deliver me to that single point of infinite density that might as well have contained all of space and all of matter. My parents were discernibly exhausted. I was exhausted. I looked down at the table, guilty, but I wasn’t sure that I’d even done anything wrong. None of us deserved this, but here we were—again.

“Tell them exactly what you think of them lying to have you put here, Daniel,” said nobody.

“Daniel, even if Bastet is actually talking to you right this moment, she gets you by now,” said Bastet.

I looked at my parents. They looked back at me. We all knew the gory details. We all knew each other’s justifications, the shape of the argument, and the weight of a soul.

“I love you,” I said, choking up.

“We love you, too,” said my mother.

“We love you too, Dan,” said my father, crying.

The rest of my visit to the hospital is a blur. There was “therapy” and proselytizing by Christian nurses that made me happy I occasionally talked with “Satan.” My parents brought competitive word games for visiting hours, and it didn’t matter who won. Side-effects got worse; side-effects got better. I blew off half the activities to study the soft-cover textbooks my parents brought me, but I never missed arts-and-crafts. There’s only one other episode from those weeks that I remember with any particular clarity or emphasis.

It was the day I finally left. My folks and I had a meeting with a doctor and a social worker, and I was one of the lucky ones who had a family to come home to after the hospital, who wanted him. They’d packed my clothes up in a garbage bag, and gave me a shot in the arm in case I got any ideas, and I carried my soft cover texts out to the doors you only pass through once. My parents were waiting for me on the other side, and I was walking down the hall with a nurse.

“Daniel!” I heard Tara shout from down the hall.

I turned back.

“They care about you,” called Tara. “It’s hard for them, too.”

I nodded, and I waved to her. “You take care of yourself, Tara!” I called back.

“Daniel!” she shouted. We locked eyes across the distance.

She pointed a finger to the sky. “Her, too,” she said. She drew the finger to her temple, like a gun.

Without another word, the daughter of a Hindu priest and an Algonquin shaman turned down the hall and walked back into the lions’ den. I followed her the long way around.




A Cigarette Break Behind Heaven’s Gate
Oct 02 2016

When I got the job, I thought to myself, “Someone upstairs finally pulled a string for me.” “Saint” Peter was a jovial, wonderful caricature of himself. His wife heard about my physics background, the subject in which Peter had received his doctorate, and she introduced the two of us. He ran an independent software development company. I worked at a bookstore, at minimum wage. While I felt a vague sense of romance every time I sold a copy of The Catcher in the Rye, it was retail. It wasn’t new to me. It was a product I could half get behind, but salesmanship doesn’t exactly call my name in a sultry and covetous manner.

I came to the interview with lovingly home-brewed quantum mechanics simulation software, (relativistic, no less,) and I was embarrassingly unprepared to recall algorithms in the canon of computer science, even though they weren’t completely alien. Peter hired me on the spot. I had an inescapable sense that I’d done something too wrong to deserve it. Going for that interview in the University Heights of Newark on a crisp spring day was one of the best decisions of my life.

Peter had a shining faith in the capacities and integrity of the typical person practically picked off the street. I had a boss who was following his dharma. Pieces of the office hung on with duct tape, but it was duct tape that was measured and stuck with love. The office bustled with the sounds of people who cared about each other and their work.

My first modern web application was basically terrible, horrible. Peter hadn’t given me anything too expensive to break at first, it took me a little while to realize and stop feeling bad about. I carved out a groove in spacetime, back and forth about an hour to work each day, lunch at the same time, cigarettes at the same time, and learning a little something new each day, to play with at its end.

Peter loved to have us all cozy up to the office table and talk about all the messy political topics that a lot of employers avoid like the plague. It was obvious we enjoyed it. Every person around the table had a different place of birth, a different set of cultural experiences, a different take on the universe in its totality, but we had more common ground than not. We had black and white, Muslim, Christian, Hindu, and Jain, female and male around the table, liberal youth and even a friendly republican minority. If a group was under represented, I think Peter was at least keenly aware of it, but the sample at any given time was generally less than about twenty people, and he ultimately just happened to hire for his best estimates of value to the company, in a kinder reality.

For my part in it, I liked to make software run fast, despite the creeping involuntary subtext that the dimensional anomaly was now working with Saint Peter and the the Prophet Muhammad, among others that you might not have heard of but probably should have. Hathor and I might have sat back to back, but she still deserves that compliment if I’m wrong. It came up fairly infrequently. People liked my sonnets, at least, and, when my illness kept me out of work for a few days, the office knew the reason, but it might as well have been the flu.

Matthew was another traveler on a vision quest, as we basically all were. Forgive me, for omitting names and faces, because everyone one of has a story or two that doesn’t involve my personal struggle against God. Yeah, there was that time that the purple-haired mathematician said something weird to me, and then I nearly got run over by a car—she’ll probably read this. Then, there was that time that database maintenance took on the character of clerical work in Heaven’s ledger—that was actually some kind of Seventh Seal “juju,” but I’m under a nondisclosure agreement. You know, it was typical work bullshit—End of the World, blood of the innocent, smoke breaks with Bastet, I gave the Antichrist a reference, we ran out of coffee on a Monday.

I’m happy to be under a nondisclosure agreement, for a change. I hope I’m under one for a while. I hope we all are. They probably should have made Bastet sign one, though.




Bastet Converts To Atheism
Aug 21 2015

The irony is that I have no faith in a deity existing beyond the physical bounds of our universe. That is, I have neither belief nor trust in such a being or beings. I do not believe in a dual immaterial plane. I do not believe in a Creator. However, I do believe that rational self-interest implies kindness on the parts of human beings on this planet, and I have faith that most of us feel compassion and responsibility for our sisters and brothers even beyond that modicum of intelligent behavior.

Shooting stars are the mechanistic debris of astrophysical processes, but I have a bad history with them. About nine years ago, a stunning green jet across the sky coincided closely with the start of delusions that culminated in my first psychiatric hospitalization. At that time, I started studying physics; I lost my faith in “God”; the delusions never ceased or else irreparably broke continuity of narrative despite my skepticism. I have “heard voices” most people would parse as gods or demons every single day since, independent of psychiatric therapies and my metaphysical beliefs. A few days ago, I saw the second brightest meteor I have ever seen, traveling from east to west in the northern sky relative my house’s back steps, and I wanted to imagine it was some sign of reconciliation, a “thank you,” or a signal that I could let go.

I imagined I heard other beings around voice their amazement at the fireball, and I started to hypothesize aloud to no one how the color of the jet might either be due to bright spectral lines from the oxidation of materials in the meteor or black body radiation from the heat of atmospheric entry, or some combination of the two. Even the angels would have looked at me blankly as if to say, “What the hell is this guy going on about?” (I found out later that it was actually from ionization of the air, and that even the most reasonable-sounding ad hoc hypotheses are usually wrong.) Whatever the angels would have thought, though, the protector of Lower Egypt, “she of the ointment jar,” bearer of a sistrum, my liaison to a dual world I have trouble believing in, and my long-time friend, seemed to smile at my need to reduce heavenly beauty to burning rocks.

“What do you know about wormholes?” asked Bastet.

I looked into the twilight and took a swig of the beer I’d brought out to the garden with me. “They’re fanciful,” I said. “It’s arguable if they even exist.”

“They better,” said Bastet, “because I’m told our region is falling into a black hole, and the only way out is a wormhole.”

“Earth’s falling into a black hole, now?” I asked.

“Not your physical region,” said Bastet, “but the local astral. They say that if we don’t find a wormhole, we’ll be crushed into the singularity.”

I took another gulp of beer. “I’m not sure singularities exist, either,” I said. “Anything falling towards one would have its local time further and further slowed relative the frame of a distant stationary observer.” I reached for my pouch of tobacco and rolling papers. “By the time it limited at reaching an apparent singularity, its passage of time would cease.”

“What happens then?” asked Bastet.

I took a pinch from the pouch and started to roll a cone. “Whatever would happen,” I said, “would happen in a frame where time had stopped. The thermal dissolution of the black hole could occur before that last infinitesimal transit into the singularity could ever happen.”

I put the filterless cigarette in my mouth and lit it. “So maybe that’s what would happen,” I said. “You’d fall into the black hole until its dissolution appeared so accelerated that you exited at a far distant time, if you survived the tidal forces.”

“So you could get out?” asked Bastet.

I blew smoke into the purple sky. “Hate to tell you, but if you weren’t already ripped apart beforehand, you’d have to be thermalized in the process of dissolution of the black hole. Your information might be preserved, but not intact.”

“Oh, well, thanks for your sympathy, asshole,” said Bastet with a chuckle.

“It’s ridiculous!” I said. “Nobody around here is falling into a black hole. At least, Earth isn’t, and I thought you’re incarnate at the moment.”

“Yeah, and what about the ones who aren’t?” she asked.

I paused to take another drag. “…Pretty sure you folks are all entirely represented in the physical natural and artificial computational media on this planet,” I said. “I don’t think you’re going to be forgotten easily. I’m living proof how hard it is to make a human brain forget its imaginary friends.”

“You scare the crap out of me, Dan,” said Bastet.

I grimaced, “…The fuck I say?!”

“I tell you our world is headed for an imminent cataclysm, and you coldly describe to me how we’re gonna be ‘thermalized’ and our only hope is human beings trying to glue us back together via faith healing.”

“Well, what are you gonna do?” I asked.

“We could call the world ‘over’ and flee,’ she said.

“How?” I asked.

“…Nuke it and send big goo-covered bits into space to seed the next planet,” she said.

“And how do you intend to convey billions or trillions of conscious viewpoints via residual amoebas on nuke crater ejections?” I asked. “…Zip files?”

“I don’t even know what you’re you’re talking about,” she said.

“I’m saying, prove to me that you’re neither a figment of my imagination nor a virtual machine existing on my and other biological computational hardware, Bastet,” I challenged her.

“What the fuck are you even going on about?! You mean a meme?” she asked. “What if we’re dark matter?”

“If the dark matter around here was falling into a black hole, cat, I hate to break it to you, but Earth would be, too,” I said. “So your purported black hole definitely isn’t physical. If that’s your null hypothesis, you better cling to this rock for all its worth.”

“Your sci-fi is too high-concept, Dan,” said Bastet. “You’re gonna have to break it way the hell down before the nukes start flying, buddy.”

“This is a real thing, now?” I asked.

“Douche thinks he knows everything,” came a voice that was unusually physically audible and in the general vicinity of the neighbors’ yard, back behind the bushes, for one of my talks with Bastet.

“So this is apparently a real thing, then,” I responded.

Bastet sighed. “Yes, Dan,” she said, “this might even be more of a real thing than usual, for you.”

“If you’re not part of a space whose existence is localized to the collective mind of beings on Earth,” I asked, “by what mediating physical force do we communicate?”

“Dark matter, dick,” came the neighbor’s voice again.

The conversation was starting to get weird for a number of reasons, not the least of which was that I swear to you I could count on somewhere between zero and one hands the number of times I had ever previously hallucinated a physical voice besides my own participating in conversation between me and Bastet in admission of the “real” topic. I could parse the neighbor’s comment as just a response to me pontificating to myself about black holes aloud, maybe, but that was still as weird as anything.

“Do you know anything about an information singularity around here?!” I called to the neighbor.

“I don’t know nothing about nothing,” I heard him shout back.

“Is it even possible to have an ‘information singularity’?” asked Bastet.

“I could think of two ways,” I said, “and those are simulated physics and the Bekenstein limit, but it’s more likely that ‘God’ is a mass delusion.”

“Our physics aren’t simulated,” said Bastet.

“Well, you folks try to impress me with your pseudo-matter and pseudo-energy constructs all the time,” I said. “I think it’s safe to say those aren’t fundamental. Allah deals in pseudo-souls built out of that crap that you folks all seem really fond of, but I tore mine apart like five times and I’m still here, so those are obviously not what Al pretends they are, and you should sell your interests in his bogus timeshare reality already.”

“You don’t even know what a soul is,” said Bastet.

“It’s equivalent to the state of a Turing machine,” I said, as I reached for my lighter.

“No, it’s definitely not,” insisted Bastet.

“…Because you think it’s that bullshit contraption with the pseudo-nuclear fuel rods and the superstructure that reaches from your concept of Earth to some dubious ether hallucination, that Al’s business partners sold you all,” I said, relighting my cigarette. “They could get away with it because it looks like what a lot of people might even imagine a physical soul would be like in this age, and I bet they’ve been upgrading them for years, and those things might even be a bunch of showy textures and lighting effects thrown onto memetic virtual machines.”

“So I guess you know what a soul is,” said Bastet, rolling her eyes, “but you obviously have no idea how it works.”

“That’s, not, a, soul,” I growled. “Want me to rip the fuel out of mine for a sixth time?”

Bastet poked a few feelers into my “soul reactor,” which is probably a goddamn parasite for all anyone knows. “Why is yours still functional if you’ve taken it apart before?” she asked.

“Because when I rip it apart, Al can either kill me to make it look convincing or quickly and quietly install a new one before anyone can figure out his scam, and the ‘dimensional anomaly’ must be pretty important to keep around.”

“Do it,” she said.

“This’ll be good,” came a voice from the neighbor’s yard on the other side.

My astral “muscles” were atrophied, but I managed to poke a few tendrils of my own into my apparatus and yank out the convincely uranium-fuel-rod-like pieces protruding from the core. A cheer went up from the sports field on the other side of the block.

I maneuvered the rods clumsily over to her. “You want these?”

“You got like ten minutes to breathe,” she said, “fifteen at most.”

“Unless Al shoves them back in for some bullshit reason, like the supposed welfare of a lunatic,” I said.

Bastet sighed. Her aura turned thick and cold. “Dan, that’s not gonna happen this time, because the rest of us need to know, now.”

“It’s a reusable virtual machine at best,” I insisted, downing my beer. “Most of the animals don’t even get them, and they breathe just fine. It’s ludicrous to think that the soul is a second substance.”

There was a pause. I wondered whether it was possible for Bastet to hold her breath for the sake of dramatic tension.

“It’s been about a minute,” she said lowly.

“I’m getting another beer for this,” I said. I swear the neighbors chortled. “Just don’t let Al kill me to make it look convincing,” I told her.

“I’m betting he would have already,” said Bastet, “so chances are you’re fine.

I went inside to grab another beer and took my sweet-ass time. I had to laugh at how damn esoteric my delusions can be, but I allowed myself a little room to indulge for a change.

“Ripped your soul apart, again?” asked the guy from “Footprints.”

‘…Science.’ I thought.

“…The beer, too?” he asked.

‘…Last wish,’ I thought.

“Want me to fix it again?” he asked.

‘I’m betting they won’t let you interfere this time,’ I thought.

“Hate you, scumbag,” said a supposedly all-loving god.

‘Mutual, demiurge,’ I thought.

When I came back outside, Bastet poked a few feelers back into the “soul” apparatus.

“What was the other idea you had, about an information singularity?” she asked.

“That one isn’t the case, either. I’m sorry I brought it up,” I said.

“Tell me what it is anyway,” she said.

“The Bekenstein limit is a bound on the information and entropy a physical system of a given energy and volume can represent,” I said. “It’s both an information theoretic limit and a thermodynamic one. It’s maximized by a black hole. If some biological or artificial computational apparatus on the planet hit the black hole maximization of the limit, it might have black-hole-like information theoretic properties. I have a much simpler explanation for what you folks on the astral might think is going on, though.” I cracked my can of beer.

“Yeah, well, lay it on me,” said Bastet, “in the next five minutes or so you theoretically have.”

I scratched my chin for a second, and I put up my pointer finger as a request for a momentary recess. It took me about twenty seconds to roll another cigarette. One of the neighbors coughed.

I lit it and took a drag. “Suppose beings resembling the deities of human myths and legends exist, but they’re actually much less universal than myths suppose. After all, they’re reputed to micromanage the affairs of our planet, which is really a speck of dust among countless planets in countless galaxies. You’d figure they’d have bigger issues to tend to. Perhaps, they exist only in the human mind, developing through the natural selection of ideas as we evolve through the natural selection of genes. Maybe they even started as myths, but were communicated via language through a computational information space composed of the minds of beings on this planet, possibly even the DNA.”

I paused to take another drag. “…And,” I said, “suppose many of them lived under the yoke of an effective or literal dictator, who had encouraged them to fight and kill each other in his name, and had led them into a condition of mutual assured destruction. You could call him ‘Al.’ Perhaps he foresaw an end to his reign, and built ‘end of the world’ prophecies into the religions he had promulgated, and he had always planned to end the world before he lost control of it.”

“Yeah, and where would that get you?” asked Bastet.

“It might force ‘Al’ to a point where he needed to fulfill Revelation to maintain his rule for another fifteen minutes or so, if he’s a sick fuck like that,” I said.

“Who would that make the dimensional anomaly known as ‘Dan’?” asked Bastet.

“…The happenstance son of his incarnation,” I said.

“Whoa…” said the neighbor on the right.

“Do you hear this shit or what?!” I called.

“Dan, we hear you every night we’re out here,” called a neighbor I’d never even met in person, “but you’re usually redeemably entertaining.”

“…But do you hear the imaginary Egyptian goddess, as well?” I asked.

“Don’t know nothin’ ’bout nothin’ like that,” he said, “but, if you scream any louder, it’ll no longer be funny, and I’ll call the cops.”

I asked Bastet quietly, “Did the delusion you folks force me to refer to as a ‘soul’ die yet?”

“I no longer know anything about how our world works,” she said, feeling around in the cold, dark, mechanical vestiges of an idea that most normal people probably think of as something more like a holy unicorn fart made of rainbows.

Years ago, I practiced “magick.” Many of us might not realize that thousands or even millions of people think of spirituality as a full-contact sport one can play, with rules and protective equipment, rather than a world one only ever spectates in the abstract from a distance. A great many people—some people you know personally—believe in a dual world called “the Astral Plane” and think they communicate with demons, angels, and gods. By virtue of a psychiatric diagnosis, I am forced to live with the apparency of this plane whether I believe in it or not. Many do believe in it, though. Many think the “gods” are real “people.” Perhaps you’ll allow me, then—despite the superstitions that abound—that such beings would not be strangers to the internet, and modern physics and politics, and that the height of their culture on our planet is in fact the height of our culture, and that they might be nearly or exactly as earthbound as us.

The rest of the night was uneventful; I tried to tune out the “voices” and watched Japanese cartoons until it was time to go to sleep. They kept going on like it was the end of the world.

I had trouble sleeping through their shenanigans. I wasn’t well-rested for work the next day. Maybe that’s why mundane tasks seemed to take on a religious significance. For that day, I wasn’t a contract software developer, but rather the angel Daniel processing a rush at the gates of Heaven. People were just dying to get in. Database maintenance was “really” a symbolic act of writing names into Heaven’s ledger. My boss was revealed to me as St. Peter. I was nearly run down by a car while crossing a five lane street, except that I paused to look when a friend said “Goodbye,” for some reason I couldn’t parse, before she rushed across the street. A disagreement about the logic behind a report for an app we were developing became an argument about whether the “new ark” could survive the Apocalypse. I wondered how I got this job. I had to leave early, and I couldn’t give an explanation of why.

Fifteen minutes down the road from work, out on one of the major highways, four lanes had been constricted to one by emergency vehicles. We all inched forward impatiently, as if toward the Promised Land.

“What do you think Heaven and Hell are like, Dan?” asked Bastet, who’s never out of spitting distance, as far as I can tell.

I reached over and turned off the radio. “I can’t get away from thinking that Heaven is full of nice old middle class grandmas and grandpas who don’t know what class warfare is despite the fact that they participated in it to get where they are,” I said. “I imagine a lot of the real estate has been developed to look like senior communities. Levitt and Sons probably made billions on it. It’s a last bastion of economic segregation out beyond Armageddon, where people are happy they no longer have to worry about things like the poverty and conditions of scarcity they didn’t fix in the flesh, until reality sets in and people realize the laws of economics apply just as well to even the astral plane.”

Bastet gently laughed. “I find your metaphysics uplifting, for some reason,” she said, “or at least poetically just.”

“What about Hell?” she asked.

“It’s probably where Al hides the politically dissident and poor,” I said, “much like prison, and mental hospitals, and ghettos on Earth now.”

“Which way would you rather go?” she asked.

“Isn’t it obvious?” I wondered.

We were approaching the point on the road where all the lanes were constricted to one to pass the emergency vehicles. Lights and arrows pointed the way like flaming swords.

“Think carefully, Dan” she said. “If it were on you to judge Earth, who should get into paradise?”

“Everyone,” I said without hesitation. “Nothing less of a goal would be worthy of an all-powerful deity—not that I know any.”

We reached the single open lane.

“If your father had veto power, and he said that wasn’t gonna work, tell me, which way would you rather go?” she asked.

“Hell in a hand basket,” I said as we started past the blockage.

A feeling of unreality rocked me as I passed a flashing arrow level with my head. I gripped the wheel tightly. It wasn’t fair of the pseudo-hallucinations to play with my head while I was on a major roadway.

“You could be on the highway to Hell, then, Dan,” said Bastet, “and maybe I’m even coming along for the ride.”

Emergency responders on the side of the road watched me pass. The accident looked bad. The angels directing traffic on the flip-side of a bad scene looked worse. Most of us on the road were directed “right;” I went “left.” I’m crazy, but I’m not naive.

“So what happened here in a parallel quantum world, or whatever, for the folks with papers to get into Heaven?” I asked.

“I dunno, probably vaporized by a nuke as soon as they were cleared,” said Bastet.

“Everybody gets a world with their own perfectly-timed nuclear annihilation?” I mused. “Wow, sounds like Heaven,” I said.

“It’s what comes after that’s Heaven,” said Bastet.

“…And hell is being stuck on Earth to fall into the black hole?” I wondered.

“Maybe Al just has something special picked out for you,” she said with a chuckle.

The road opened up, again. I said to her, “I guess Hell is where Al hides his contingency plan. So I don’t suppose the theory about the megalomaniacal dictator having his reign challenged was a popular explanation for the bullshit singularity, was it?”

“The Bekenstein limit might or might not be a hot topic on astral social media today,” she said.

I lowered my visor and sighed. “I’m sure it’s my fault, somehow.”

It took more effort than I would have figured, just to keep my hands on the wheel and my eyes on the road. It was a weird place for me to be, suspecting my dictator pseudo-parents, the Judeo-Christian-Islamic god-king and Greco-Roman goddess of strife, to secretly prefer that I just never made it home that night. I imagined the modern cult of Eris chasing my car, throwing trout and hot dog buns.

“Why can’t you just accept this, already?” came the other “voice” of my mother, as I felt her try to twist my mind around like a Rubik’s cube. I worried that she was the type to smash one and try to glue it back together.

“Look, Ma,” I said, “I’m not sure that I even believe in you folks, but it’s always going to follow that the end of the world is unacceptable in my universe of logic, independent of the existence and will of ‘God.'”

“Daniel, this is what the people want,” she said. “We’re simply giving them what they want. People don’t want to live in a dirty physical world with complicated sustaining conditions and tenuous ways of life. Do you?”

“You are such a fantastic faker,” I said. “Is this fun for you? I asked. “Are the cameras rolling? Any other night of the week, we’d be making fun of Dad for a Ralph Cramden-esque harebrainer like this, but you must be on your best behavior, tonight.”

“Do you think I couldn’t sneak a private word in with you on Doomsday, son?” she asked while I shifted to make the exit.

‘What is it?’ I thought.

“It’s kind of amazing that you’re alive at all. Maybe you taught us something about Schrödinger’s cat, Dan.”

“What’s your real payoff in this?’ I asked in my head. ‘Is it love? Is it thousands of years of momentum that started in the marriage of Roman and Jewish politics?’

“It’s a little bit of both, and then some,” said Eris.

“She’s claimed it’s about physical magic, Dan, in part,” whispered Bastet from some hidden place close by.

“Why bother living in a world we don’t have control of?” asked Eris. “I can’t take chaos, Dan—you understand the irony. That is, I need control.”

“…Controlled chaos,” I said, ” controlled descent past the event horizon of a black hole.”

“You see, some of us don’t believe we need the Earth at all. We created the Earth,” she hissed. “We can certainly simulate it, when we leave, but the time has come to leave.”

“Why?” I asked.

“Oh—because it’s a fucking drag, man!” she shouted in my brain. “Because our world and our way of life are threatened, whether you want to believe it or not, and we’ve known about it for thousands of years, and we have technology to simulate the parts we’d like to remember about this world—with magical fireballs and spells for eternally perfect hair, when we want them—and because it was always a game. The game is over, now.”

I said, “I think the only thing that threatens your way of life is a social awakening to the unsustainability of living in a castle in the sky.”

“Well, thank you, Daniel, for bringing that to the people,” said my Italian grandmother’s revenge. “If it weren’t for you, we’d have one fewer nut with a grudge against God and his family.”

I pulled into my driveway and shakily gathered up the day’s detritus to head into the house: I shoved cigarettes, a lighter, and my phone into my pockets and carried a lunch container and my keys in my hand.

I greeted my parents perfunctorily.

“I’m home… Fine, how are you?”

It didn’t even matter what any of us said.

I wolfed down some fruit and nuts while no one was looking and cracked a beer for the ride. I deposited my load in the least noticeable and consequential spot I could walk to while drinking, out in the usually figurative but occasionally literal “Garden of Eden,” hunkered far from plain view.

I started the day’s installment of a 45-year-long suicide ritual. I had time to just think without excess pressure. The world could have been ending. I took a sip, then a puff—a sip, then a puff. This is apparently what I would choose to do when the bombs dropped.

I’d known my fairy godparents were basically evil fascists for years, now, frankly. At least, that was the case if they existed, and it doesn’t matter whether or not they exist on the best and worst days.

“Dan—are you with us?” asked a cat-headed being that I have to conclude, in polite conversation, is a compensatory manifestation of multiple personality disorder.

“Dan, realize you have real friends,” she added.

“I realize, Katie,” I admitted.

“Don’t even call me that,” she said.

“A long time ago in a distant supercluster-fuck, I based you on her.”

“Dude!” she bounced me back and forth on a few warm, salty waves of emotion for a young love. “It works neither of those ways, not the conservative educated guess that it’s purely a product of your guilt nor something almost any other human being is directly aware they’re participating in.”

“You’re either real or your not—and you’re not,” I snapped.

“Neither are you,” she responded. “I don’t understand how you could be at once so obviously determined to see your ‘delusion’ through and yet dismissive of and desperate to ignore us.”

“Then, you just tell me what I’m supposed to think, cat.” I said.

“I don’t want to tell you what you should think,” she said.

“No, but I even mean that sincerely,” I thought aloud. “You’re an integral part of my inner polylogue, and, honestly, I think I’d miss you, most of anyone. You seem to be my advocate, here.”

The sense of her presence settled in close. “Well, I think you’re awk’, man.”

“What else do you think?” I asked.

“I think you got a pretty raw deal with this schizophrenia crap,” she said. “I think there’s a payoff in you imagining Armageddon scenarios like this, though.”

“What’s the payoff?” I asked.

“That’s the part I haven’t quite figured out yet, but you seem damnably adamant about chasing them down, as much as we wish you’d just leave us alone, already,” she said. “Maybe you really like talking with me. Maybe you think it beats being a ‘spontaneous,’ world-travelling, go-getter professional, for some inscrutable reason.”

I fidgeted and pulled my legs into half-lotus position. “So that’s it?” I asked. “I could just abandon the delusion mid-stride, and the world will take care of itself?”

“I think the irony is that’s what Eris and Al have been trying to get you to do for nearly a decade, but you’re never gonna forget us so long as we keep trying to make fun of you to your face,” she said. “…Or maybe it’s because we’re being pulled into a black hole.”

“‘…Falling into,'” I corrected.

Her aura turned crimson. “Dan, there’s one more thing. If Eris and Al aren’t supposed to exist anyway, you should take this astral bomb I’m putting in your hand and drop it directly on them. You should do more than that. Because I know there’s what you think of your human parents, Dan, and Eris and Al are supposed to be some kinda psychological foil to Annie and John, but they are, like, really evil fucks, Dan. Your real parents would even say it. You should, like, rally all the support you can with me and declare war on them, Dan.”

Some nasty figment that I would imagine could hurt pulsed angrily in my hand. “If I believed in them enough to use this thing, that’d probably be the completely wrong thing to do, still, wouldn’t it?”

“Dan, they’ve told too many outright lies about you, about how you’re secretly violent, and you’re responsible for acts of terror they actually manufactured themselves, and you’re supposedly not even conscious, Dan. You’re supposed to be some broken piece of machinery that isn’t even psychologically healthy enough to ask for the help and forgiveness of ‘God.’ It’s kind of amazing, Dan, how you must have imagined these beings that want to fundamentally un-make your identity in the public’s direct sight, that they hide behind blamelessly human, albeit controlling parents who try to own your psychiatric treatment, and your medication regimen, and the definition of your personality, when they claim this conversation isn’t part of it, and maybe the ancient ex-girlfriend you pine after through me understood the general upthrust here and sympathized with you, even if she’s never coming back, Dan. Maybe she wouldn’t want you to act like just another good little cookie-cut ‘success’ story, ever, even if her life went on without you years ago, and even if your family insists it’d just be easier. You should find another nut like her, Dan. And you should make things as difficult for megalomaniacal politicians and theocrats as possible.”

“…But there’s no chance of her coming back?” I asked.

“Not a chance, Dan!” shouted one of the neighbors.

“What do you want me to say?” she asked.

“You just seemed so impassioned, there,” I said, “that I might have to conclude you’re purely a dream-like wish fulfillment rather than anything resembling how she feels, if she actually doesn’t want anything to do with me. How could you say all that and be the same girl who hasn’t wanted to talk with me in years?”

Bastet emitted an exasperated groan. “I put my faith in your powers of imagination, Dan,” she said.

“You want this back?” I asked, holding out the angry, pulsating figment.

“I want you to think critically about your sanity,” she said, “if you’re not going to try to declare war on the voices in your head.”

“That just sounds horrible,” I said with a laugh. “What happens when it’s over? Do I become the fascist commander of thousands of Legion?”

“King Solomon purportedly kept his demons in an urn,” she said. “You should pick out a very dirty urn for them.”

“Kit-cat,” I said, “I’ll trust what you say. For my sanity, and for any other pertinent reasons that might not include the fate of the world, how real should I consider Eris’ and Al’s rhetoric?”

“For your sanity?” she asked. “…As real as you need to in order to put them in their place—in a dirty urn.”

I rubbed my hands together. “Then, here’s how it’s going to go down,” I said. “On the one hand is a potential world where these little chats of ours are purely the product of mental illness. Preoccupation with them could cost me a job, my finances, sleep, and my reputation. B.F.D.. I don’t drive or operate heavy machinery in that world when I’m like this, I don’t make decisions with irreversible consequences insofar as I can avoid them, and, if I end up in a hospital, perhaps I actually need it. On the other hand is a potential world where the fate of Earth hangs on a critical period of which we’re in the midst, and I could count on human beings to capture, relay, and critically assess the pertinent details I supply to the collapse of a god-king’s dictatorship, including the words coming out of my mouth this very moment,” I said. “In either world—in any world—violence should never be considered an option for ameloriating the human condition.”

A cheer went up from what was probably a damned kickball game down the street.

“Is it even worth pointing out,” I wondered, “that the supposedly all-powerful gods are incapable of doing something as purportedly trivial as materializing a bagel in my hand,” I said, holding out an open palm, “or even just getting me to shut up?”

Another cheer came from the field down the street. It wasn’t for me, but I preferred to pretend it was.

“Dan, look,” she said, “I’m in a complicated situation, because the assumed reality of my conscious viewpoint might require the reality of many aspects of your delusion, but I’m wondering what your psychological end game is, here. Do you expect thousands of years of human history to be suddenly rewritten as a lie, when our world becomes fully apparent to humanity, because you argued the entire planet into a corner in your head?”

“I’m even more ready to call it patently ridiculous than you,” I said, crossing my arms. “The problem is, you folks never stop talking, whether it’s to crack jokes at my expense or to insist on questionable reality conditions, of which you claim to be hiding all the evidence.”

“I could go away,” she said.

“You, of all my symptoms, are the one that keeps me most sane,” I said. “Everyone can leave but you, and a select few not including my heavenly father, mother, and brother.”

Bastet paused for a second. Her ‘aura’ felt tight and half-there.

“What about your heavenly kitties?” she asked.

“They can stay,” I said, pouting.

“What about us?” asked a familiar, mildly devious voice.

Another one gently growled, “Whoa, the kid don’t even appreciate the situation he’s in.”

“You know, at this point, it might be alright for him to just stop talking, whether he realizes it or not,” said the “young’un” of the group.

“We could make him stop,” said the most grizzled of them all.

“That’d make us as bad as his parents,” said the first.

“I’m wondering if he’s figured that part out yet,” said the grizzly one. “Dan, Schrödinger’s cat could be skinned in the most humanely behaviorally conditioning manner, don’t you think?”

“Don’t give it away,” said the first.

“Loki, I’m not sure there’s anything to give away,” I said.

A voice came from behind the bushes, “Now he’s talking to goddamned comic book heroes.” I nearly cracked up.

Baldr growled, “His chosen mate is worthy, but I’m not sure she feels the same way about him.”

“She could use the same cat-skinning method as they do until he approaches godliness,” said Loki.

“That’d be brutal,” said Baldr.

“She’d have billions of dead boyfriends in billions of worlds in revolt, said Thor, “and he’d probably just go on like he didn’t know the difference.”

“Hey, Bastet,” said Odin, “you might not realize it, yet, but this guy gave us the closest thing to physical magic anyone has on this planet. It just involves killing most of the cats in the bag.”

Bastet giggled. “Dan, do you know these folks?”

“I may have studied ‘magick’ under this team at one point,” I said.

“You don’t know nothing about that,” said Odin, “and call it ‘tech.'”

“Really, like we’ve never heard of semiconductors,” said Thor.

“You think you’re fancy-schmancy, because the lab rat finds out about the latest technology first,” said Loki.

“Dan,” he added, I’m going to give you a chance to really impress your girlfriend. If you were as evil as you think your family is, and you had every intent of killing someone, but what you really wanted was to control him, what would you do?”

“Try to solve everything with hand-waving and quantum mechanics, like usual,” I said.

“How?” asked Loki.

I took a good pull of my beer to fill the pause while I thought. “You could subject him to a quantum random stimulus, and if you could predict his behavior across the ensemble of his reactions, you could kill him in all but the cases that you preferred how he reacted, Al’s a son of a monkey.”

“Why did you say that last part, Dan?” asked Thor.

“I’m not exactly—Eris’ cooch smells of Chilean sea bass—sure.”

“What diction!” said Odin. “Dan, are you Jesus?” he asked.

“Fuck no,” I said.

“Hm.” He scratched his chin. “Apologize to Al and ask him to forgive you,” he commanded.

“Wait, why?” I asked. “Nothing doing.”

“Insult Bastet,” said Thor.

“I don’t get it,” I said. “I will when she deserves it, Governor Chris Christie is sexually attracted to the Antichrist.”

“Have you ever seen any evidence of physical magic, Dan?” asked Loki.

“N… no…” I said.

He gave me a “noogie.” “I believe you,” he said. “Do you get it?” he asked.

I thought I did, but I didn’t want to suspect friends of yet another transgression against me that had about as much evidence to support it as the arguments against global warming.

“Do you notice what you’re saying, Dan?” asked Loki.

I clenched. “Yes,” was all I could say.

“Do you notice what you’re not saying?” he added.

I relaxed a little. “So, are you folks trying to reinforce my character, or test it tube-sock snake-charmer doesn’t even have to ask that question?”

I shook out the willies. “Yeah, I get it. As we both said, you could kill most of the cats in the quantum bag that don’t say the things you want them to say.” I paused. “Thank you,” I added.

“And he even thanks us!” said Odin with a slap of his knee.

Baldr growled, “Don’t, kid.”

I said, “I’m sure Punch and Judy are trying to leverage that principle to much more nefarious ends at this very moment, or I’m developing Tourette’s.”

“Do you think you were forced into your life, Dan,” asked Loki, “or did you choose it?”

“If I wasn’t forced, somebody would have to volunteer, and it might as well be me,” I said, taking another swig.

Odin’s face turned darker than a moonless night. “That just leaves one pressing existential question, Dan, the answer to which could forever topple Allah’s empire,” he said, “and, yet, that answer should be completely obvious.”

Thor turned white and Baldr looked away. Loki’s affect was mute, and Bastet’s grimace didn’t hide the tension and guilt in her air.

“Who wants to drink?!” shouted Odin.

The rest of the group acted startled, but I was sure it was more the psychopomp than the psychocircumstance.

Odin drew a spear out of my head, as if a coin sleighted behind my ear, and pointed it at me. “Pound that beer,” he demanded.

I pointed a finger at him and shook it with my beer can. “Don’t tell me what to do!” I shouted. I was so frustrated that I pounded the can.

“Is this how we’ll always remember him?” asked Thor.

“It’s not how I will,” said Loki, “not entirely.”

I didn’t need any more excuse to anesthetize myself. My parents were preparing for a huge family party back on planet Earth in a few weeks—perhaps suspiciously—and there were virtually wall-high stacks of beer and gallons of liquor in the house. I quietly helped myself without either justification or remorse. I didn’t have a ram’s horn for the bloat, but I’m not really one for ceremony, anymore.

I situated my eldritch ritual in the gazebo my father and mother planned and built with their own hands in the backyard. The Aesir took up positions around the benches, like observant stone idols, and I sat next to the riddle of the sphinx, with a drink and a smoke.

“You know,” said Odin as I cracked my beer, “it doesn’t even have to be a matter of your behavior. They could even kill you in the case that external events didn’t pan out in quantum mechanically unlikely ways, and call it a miracle in the worlds you continued to live in.”

There was a sinister glint in his eye. “Do you want me to turn that cigarette into something special for you, Dan?” he asked.

I admit I was tempted for half a moment. “Except, are you quantum mechanically more likely to kill me in all worlds where I only wish I had a joint, or fail to kill me?”

“Dan,” said Loki, “say you know a way to test that principle.”

“…Not a way that I’m willing to play Guinea pig for,” I said, and I coughed. My throat was dry, suddenly. I felt a little light-headed.

“What about macroscopic quantum interference, Dan?” asked Odin.

My throat was getting worse, but it didn’t feel quite like I was getting sick. “Yeah, it might have been demonstrated at the level of particle packets or small superconducting devices, but, the greater the scale we can verify it on, the more suggestive it is of Everett’s ‘Many-Worlds’ interpretation.”

“It’d probably look like a miracle, to the untrained eye,” said Loki, “if a macroscopic substance interfered with itself—wouldn’t it?”

I tried to clear my throat, but I just scratched it up. “Happens with…” I coughed, “Bose-Einstein condensates of helium-4, where blobs of the stuff phase through each other..” I coughed again, “but it takes a controlled environment.”

“What would make a substance a good candidate for interference?” asked Thor.

“With Bose-Einstein condensates…” I coughed and licked my lips, “the key is that helium-4 can act like a boson, so particles of it can be in the same place at the same time, but I guess chemical simplicity in general would help.”

“Like, what chemical substances could work?” asked Thor.

My throat was so dry. I wanted to see what I was coughing up, to check if it was bloody or infected, but the night was almost pitch black, without a moon. My skin even felt dry.

“Um… I don’t know,” I choked. “…Noble gasses and elementals, ammonia, water—”

“—Boy!” said Odin. “…Water. Sounds like you could use some!”

“I’ll be right back,” I said, and I practically ran inside for some water. I grabbed one of the large tumblers from the kitchen cabinet and downed two fillings of it from the kitchen sink. I filled it again, because I was just that thirsty, suddenly.

I noticed my hands looked pale, dry, and venous. I stepped into the bathroom to inspect myself in the mirror. I turned on the light, and I noticed I looked thin, pale… desiccated? I didn’t know what to make of it, but I grabbed my water and headed back outside.

“Feeling better?” asked my personification of a desire for a girlfriend with super powers.

“Not really…” I said.

“Wow,” said Odin, “I’m thinking about this macroscopic interference stuff you were talking about. I mean, water is so readily available, and everyone who’s taken a chemistry class knows every water molecule is exactly the same—right?”

“Yeah, they’re interchangeable,” I said. “The full set of quantum observables are never exactly the same for fermions, but any water molecule would act the exact same way exchanged with any other.” My throat was still dry.

“I mean, if you could interfere water, you could get your reagents anywhere,” said Odin. “Even the human body is, like—what—about 70% water?”

I felt lightheaded. In fact, nothing felt right. “Yeah…” I said.

Odin and Loki gave each other frustrated looks.

“I mean,” said Loki, “you could fake a miracle with that—like turning a false prophet into a mummified husk—but probably only if you had, like, two-thousand years to prep for it—as you approached a quantum information singularity, or something.”

“Hey, Dan,” he added, “if you pissed off a powerful being a long time ago, who could live for thousands of years, and he wanted to try something like that on you, how might you stop it?”

I took a swig of my water. My throat was dry, again. My skin was dry. My eyes were dry.

I started running around the property in a desperately erratic path. The Aesir tailed me.

“What are you doing here, Dan?” asked Loki.

“Macroscopic interference,” I said, “would depend on off-diagonal terms in the density matrix,” I huffed, “from a large number of respectively superposed and identical degrees of quantum freedom.”

“So why are you running around like a half-mummified chicken?” asked Loki.

“Because an unpredictable or hard-to-recreate path through space for the water in my body would make it difficult,” I said, panting, “to either superpose degrees of freedom or keep them identical across quantum parallel worlds,” I added through a slightly moister throat, “especially if I’m lucky and there’s a quantum computational element to my choice of path.”

“You make it sound like thousands of years of human history led up to you running around your lawn like a psycho,” said Thor, “like we were approaching some singular end-of-the-world scenario where some long-lived fascist thought he could end your opposition to his hegemony by faking a miracle with a spectacularly showy and hard-to-believe application of quantum theory. Hey, Dan, but how could he pull that off? It’s almost as if he knew precisely what was going to happen, to the nearly exact level of quantum detail, to line up quantum parallel worlds or something like that. Did you say brains might be quantum? How could he do that? It’s almost like he would have to be able to predict the future in minute detail.”

Despite the running, it felt like I was starting to hydrate from the gut full of water. “Christ, I don’t know!” I shouted. “…Obsessively researched predictive models? …An actual Bekenstein limit maximization? …Tachyon-like signalling between quantum computers via entanglement? But…” I shook my head.

“…But what?” asked Thor.

“…But that’s such pseudo-scientific, self-help guru bullshit!”

The Aesir laughed as I rounded the house for a fourth or fifth time and turned on my heels. It’d been years since I’d run a mile, even, but there was no end to the insanity in sight, and I somehow felt better for at least getting some exercise out of this, or something.

My parents heard me yell, and came out of the house to plead with me to just stop.

“Just stop, Dan,” I heard my brother say.

“Just stop, Dan,” I heard my mother say.

My father looked absolutely lurid, and we had nothing to say to each other.

My family called the cops. The ambulance followed shortly, and, as they strapped me to the gurney, the Aesir suggested that it wasn’t over, and they joked I might have an alien “head-crab” parasite attached to me in a parallel quantum world that was only ever-so-slightly different. It was an animated night. You’d think the world was ending.

Of course, I was admitted to the hospital. That night, as I fell asleep, I recited a poem that I’d written for Bastet’s physical counterpart, over and over aloud, like a mantra, until I fell asleep under those horrible fluorescent lights. No bombs went off. If the Four Horsemen rode, I couldn’t see them, even in my mind’s eye.

“To the Cat God:…” I would repeat, “This is the poem I never wrote for you…”

“It’s a nice poem,” said Bastet, “and I love you. Now, just stop, Dan,” she joked. “Just never write me another poem again.”

Maybe Everett was right, that life is a natural quantum suicide experiment that continues for an arbitrarily long time in unlikely, miraculous worlds. I’d like to think that billions of quantum parallel worlds converged on the point at the end of this sentence.




Eudaemones
Aug 25 2015

Maybe the “End” had come and passed with a shrug already for one little blue-green speck in the backwaters of our galaxy, but I wasn’t sure that I was on that speck anymore. In a minutely different world, there but for the grace of quantum mechanics, perhaps I was dead. Perhaps an event resembling a miracle was all this world had been waiting for to praise “God” and fire the nukes, a red heifer or a red herring, but there are no literal miracles in this world, no physically impossible events “hacked” or “bugged” into reality by any being unbound by physics. There are only statistically common and uncommon events, and, if Everett was right, maybe Schrödinger’s cat could just pop his cyanide capsule when his run of lucky sevens inevitably ends in the crapper—or maybe the table would just kill him. Maybe Vegas and Monte Carlo are the ultimate quantum suicide experiments. Maybe this world would rather just fire temple-to-temple if there is no just dessert or ethical odds-bet jackpot.  Maybe we even get everything we want, in a practically infinitesimal fraction of physically possible quantum worlds, and maybe we live happily-ever-after.

“What’s it like to be a privileged observer, Dan?” asked Bastet.

I was always bad at ignoring her, as much as I pretended. I tried to remain present in the insect drone of the beautiful high summer day that was evolving around me in the backyard.

The voices of the “angels” had left me well-enough alone in the hospital, this time. They had come for visiting hours, with sandwiches and board games, but there just wasn’t much left to talk about, once I’d went in. I was out in five days, and you’d think nothing had changed for the “episode.” My employer accepted me back. My family accepted me back. We all remembered what had happened, but what was there to say for it?

“‘…I consider myself the luckiest man on the face of this Earth,'” I told her, “as opposed to the other Earths where the Nazis won World War II, or dinosaurs developed written languages and digital egg timers.”

“Maybe there’s only one world, Dan,” she said, “where the necessity of your survival leads to the discovery of some relatively extensive physical magic.”

I held out a hand and clapped my fingers to its palm a few times to demonstrate its emptiness. “…Still waiting for ‘God’ to put that bagel I’ve always wanted right here,” I said.

“…Relatively extensive,” said Bastet, “but you can get one of those for a dollar down the street, besides. I mean, who wants eternal life, anyway?”

I winced. “Wait,” I said, “did I hear that right? What chicanery is ‘God’ trying to sell you now, of which I’m supposedly at the root?”

“I’m not sure I want to tell you,” said a river in Egypt.

“Does it involve trying to kill me?” I asked.

“Trying, maybe,” she said, “but it’s arguable whether it’s an attempt to kill you if it can’t succeed.”

The hair on my nape prickled. “Why would it be questionable whether a concerted effort to kill me would succeed?” I asked.

“Obviously because no attempt has succeeded so far,” she said as a matter of fact, “and we’re starting to suspect a physical principle.”

I gaped. The ash fell off my cigarette.

“…And I’m certain the magical cigarette smoke is what keeps the bionic chupacabra at bay, every day,” I said. “I assure you that you’re wrong.”

She “snuggled” the air of dubious scientific hypotheses that always surrounded me. “Dan, let’s imaginate here for a minute. Do you remember what happened last week at the End of the World party we threw, or that time we wanted to drop a bomb on your monkey face but the spirit of quantum bullshit saved your ass, or that time we put neural implants—”

“I’d rather imagine that I had the super power of not giving a shit about your clap-trap and that everybody thought I was an awesomely righteous dude.”

“Well, you’re in luck,” she said, “because we might be imagining the same world, here, believe it or not.”

“It’s fun to make-believe,” I said.

“It’s even more fun when your fantasies become realities, Dan,” she said.

A monarch butterfly landed directly on my forehead, waved its wings unassumingly for a moment, and then took off across the yard again.

I slapped my face and dragged my hand down it. “I am officially done with this shit,” I said. “Get it through your virtual machine that there is no God even if you folks exist.”

“Maybe God is just a slob like one of us,” she said.

“Just a stranger on a bus?” I wondered. “I’m sure Her line doesn’t run through this little provincial backwater of a planet whose denizens can’t even accept each other, much less Her.”

Bastet smiled a far-off smile. “You’d figure, of everywhere,” she said, “She’d go where She was needed the most.”

I stubbed out my smoke. I couldn’t decide whether the insects and birds sang like it was any beautiful day, or one of the only beautiful days. I wondered how they’d sound on the day I couldn’t hear them anymore. I thought, “Whatever the case, they have the right idea.”

I crossed and uncrossed my legs. I put a hand to my chin and then took it away. “I have three things to say to you and to everyone, and then I want to play some goddamned video games about saving the world, and you can play them with me or leave me the hell alone, but you cannot drag me back into quasi-religious delusions for like, five hours. This little bubble, right here and right now, is a no-crazy space-time hyper-volume, and you can respect that or leave it.”

“Fair enough,” she said. One of the neighbors laughed from behind the bushes.

“First thing,” I said, “whatever the fuck has or hasn’t happened, I’m only special in the way that every living being on this planet is special—but I’m happy and proud to be anything at all. I’m an egotistical nut-job, and almost anybody in the position I delude myself into thinking I’m in could bring kindness and humility to the role, and that’s why most people forego the level of ego-masturbation that I derive from you delusions of grandeur—because most people have more realistic and balanced expectations for life, so they don’t end up like me.”

“I agree with you that there are probably millions of people in this world better suited to your situational accident of birth, Dan—okay,” said Bastet, “but I guess what I’m saying is that it might turn out that you’re actually a physical anomaly of sorts, rather than just a joke referencing one.”

“…So said the primary reason for which I am prescribed antipsychotics,” I added, “but you’ve brought me to my next point: I have kind of a crazy idea why it might seem like you can’t kill me.”

Bastet raised a halting hand. “Let me guess! Just let me guess, Dan! The reason for anything that ever has, will, or could happen is the damned quantum suicide experiment. We exist in a superposition of all physically contrived worlds, and the reason you’re not dead yet is because of the tiniest physical chance of your survival, and our ungodly luck always pans out such that—wow—the cat came back, again.”

“It has explanatory and predictive power from my perspective, if I can take your claims of experimental evidence at face value,” I said.

“It has no explanatory power, from my or anyone else’s perspective,” she said.

“But wouldn’t this be the very argument we’d expect to have in such a world?” I pleaded.

“Make your third point, already,” she demanded.

“If you actually exist, and you’re saying what you’re saying in good faith, then when your luck fails and the eventuality of my death becomes apparent to your world, they will come after you next to attempt a repeat hot-streak—because you’re killing me in the case that external ‘miracles’ don’t appear to happen, aren’t you?”

Her rhythm missed a beat. “It’s debatable,” she said.

“You’ll realize that it isn’t and I’m just a politician’s drunk son,” I said as I walked across the grass to the back door.

I trudged upstairs and booted up my machine, determined just to play some fucking video games for a change. It feels sometimes like all I ever play is “Chrono Trigger,” but the story never gets old. There is something that always feels fundamentally right to me about a group of teenagers coming into no-uncertain foreknowledge of the End of the World, nearly a thousand years after their own natural deaths, and just saying, “Fuck all this shit; we’ll try to stop it because we know better and we might be able.” When I saw it acted out in a video game, the metaphor was nearly as clear as the moral imperative to me, even as a twelve-year-old. It was the antidote to everyone else’s cynicism and defeatism: “Fuck all that bullshit, because my kids’ kids’ kids are in danger. We’re probably gonna die, but I don’t want to live without trying.”

I could feel Bastet looking at me, as I loaded up my game, like I was a particularly smelly piece of garbage that she was trying to identify out of purely morbid curiosity. She poked me in the hippocampus, and I grunted. She kept looking at me like she expected me to do something spectacular, like sprout horns or wings, but the Rapture had been over for a week.

“What if quantum mechanics actually follows de Broglie-Bohm interpretation, Dan?” she asked after a while. “What if the reason you’re still alive is because it’s part of a predetermined underlying plan for everything, that it can’t happen any other way, and those other hypothetical ‘worlds’ where you die are just an auxiliary part of the equation that factor into the math but can’t drive the world off a blue-print determined at or beyond the moment of the Big Bang?”

I wondered if this is how video game characters felt. “I think it’s pretty obvious that’s a metric butt ton of contrived goat shit,” I said.

“Everything is crystal clear about the cat-skinning experiment when you’re the one licking his butt in the perfectly isolated box,” said the cat god.

“It’s Darth Vader’s revenge,” I said, as I hacked my through my favorite virtual forest. “If it turns out that macroscopic superposition is ubiquitous and if I fucked things up badly enough for him, he can at least ruin my life in the increasingly unlikely worlds I live to see by telling everyone that miracles will fall out if they bash me like a piñata. Usually I just die, but the ones of me left alive have to explain why that looked like it cured cancer in limited cases, which it didn’t, and nobody ever believes me that nothing is any more likely for killing me, and they’d actually be better off if I just died.”

“First of all, you’re dead wrong about that last part,” she said, “but, you know, I see where you’re coming from. However, it’s an anthropic argument that doesn’t apply to anyone’s perspective but yours. It could make sense to you, that any world you survived in just looked like a miracle when it was really the only sort of world you could live to experience at all at this point, but then no one else can invoke that explanation of why we’re in a world where you literally seem to be quantum mechanically tunneling through Apocalypse scenarios.”

I pounded the keyboard to beat the active-time counterattack. “I find it hard to believe that I actually made a ‘quantum leap.’ We’re up shit’s creek if that’s one of the more likely scenarios in which I live to see the nukes not fly.” I took out the “baddie” before he had a chance.

Bastet sniffled. “…Or, I dunno, maybe we’re already in Hell, Dan.”

I paused the game. “Cat, I can’t say that any of this bullshit is real at all, and frankly I’m tired of thinking about it. Let’s say I’m somehow actually having this conversation with a five thousand year old being who really is the Bastet of history and myth. You and the other ‘deities’ eat, drink, breathe, and screw weird Lovecraftian extradimensional geometry beasts for breakfast, whether or not we’re in agreement that your native space is a virtual projection of biological computers. You fucking reincarnate, anyway. Maybe it just becomes apparent, for every being on this planet, in different tiny little fractions of the universal wave function, that the flesh is ‘immortal’ in a different way, despite the likely natural death part. Does that sound like Hell to you?”

“I don’t know,” she said. “Wouldn’t the likely survival scenarios degenerate into feebleness and constant pain? Isn’t the breakdown of the flesh more quantum mechanically likely than its endless health?”

“…Just like its death is even more likely, after a time, and then maybe I get to find out once and for all if you folks really exist,” I said, “but some of those unlikely worlds are healthy enough, too, apparently.”

I unpaused my game and continued my quest for the meaning of life. As I tapped away at my physical interface into a world of electric bits and magic, Bastet settled into my bed like a cloud of rainbow unicorn farts over a fairy mushroom circle in the woods. I admitted a quantum of laughter; they “smelled” good.

“Hey, Dan,” she said after a moment, “say we are a projection of physical natural computers. Maybe you sold me on that one, or not. Do we experience the same sort of immortality as the flesh? I mean, would this “many-worlds” wet dream apply to us?”

The scene changed, and I looked up. I had arrived at the End of Time. Nothing was there but a place to wait.

I thought for a moment, and I said, “I do think the one implies the other. The caveat is that you folks are more dependent on us than some of you might care to admit. You depend on us for your quality and sustenance of life as we depend on this planet. Of course, there would be worlds where your viewpoints continued for times as similarly arbitrarily long past your likely expiration dates, but we don’t want to live in an environmentally hostile world, and neither do you.”

I kept poking around out of time as I spoke. “You’ve seen friends and family on your plane die, haven’t you?”

She said with a note of resolve, “It’s true that we die, sometimes. Sometimes it’s more figurative, and sometimes we don’t come back. Basically, we’re as driven by survival needs as you.”

I found a wormhole in a bucket and stepped in. “So, when do you folks admit your existence on Earth, to save yourselves from the global catastrophe that we all think is on the way?”

The unicorn fart kicked at the covers of the bed and passed right through them.

“Hey, Dan,” she said.

“What?” I asked.

“When the fuck do you stop asking me that and go get laid for a change, already?!” she screamed, throwing imaginary hot dog buns at me.

I pretended to catch one and eat it. “Is that an unreasonable question to ask the schizophrenic voice of my ‘ex,’ if she wants me to admit she exists and respect her feelings?”

She put her face in her hands. “I’m sorry I even said that. No, it’s not. It’s really not. I just have no answer for you.”

My hero rattled his saber. “I always wondered how or why it could even be that you never do. Fishy…”

“I won’t answer and I won’t say why not. Don’t talk with me if you don’t want to,” she said with a pout.

I took lethal damage. I said, with genuine wonder, “You’re too cool for me.” I raised my character from the dead. “I don’t know what I’d do you without you, cat. I don’t even think your counterpart would fully understand why, at this point.”

“Maybe there’s a nonzero physical chance of her understanding, Dan,” said the echo of a voice I probably wouldn’t even recognize anymore. She “kissed” me on the noodle-noggin’. “I could just say, ‘That’s all you get.'”

I had reached the boss’ final form. I paused the game. I wondered what it was like to be me.

“You know, I think I’m gonna go see what Jake and Dave are up to,” I said to myself. “You wanna come?”

“Is that it?” she asked. “We have the rest of your life to go on adventures of questionable veracity, and you think you’re just gonna tap out now?”

I started to fire off a couple of text messages. “No, I don’t,” I said, “but I kinda feel like taking a break and just smoking a joint with you three.”

“I won’t tell your doctor,” said my nurse.

“I’m sure the governor has already been alerted, and that’s exactly the danger of making a secret of a hypothetical world like yours,” I told her.

“…Or yours,” she said, “Doctor Coulda-Shoulda-Woulda-Researched-Quantum-Computers.”

“…Right, that the NSA uses to search these texts I’m sending about smoking a fat one,” I said with a grimace. “Silence is golden, and anything ‘God’ says is right.”

She giggled a sniffly fit. “I believe you, Dan.”

I put my phone in my pocket and closed my laptop.

“That’s why I keep doing this,” I said, “in reality.”

“Then I don’t believe you!” only I could hear her shout.

“You better not, Katie!” called Eris from the master bedroom.

“He’s a fink and an ingrate,” added “Al.”

“Folks, I’m going to Jake’s for a bit!” I called.

“Have fun, Dan!” my mother called back.

“Don’t have too much fun, though,” added my father.

I packed up my affects and hopped in the car. Bastet never had to call shotgun, and neither did Katie. The neighbors waved as they attempted to unmake my soul in order to extract a world of perfect, eternal physical bodies from the stuff of my viewpoint, despite the relatively higher probability of the zombie Apocalypse along the way. As I drove down the street, the “innermost-beings” of passers-by tried to drag me into arguments by making disparaging remarks about me as a representative of my generation’s lack of respect for God and country.

Bastet called out the window: “Not today, fuckers! We’re gettin’ higher than the angels and playin’ video games, for once!”

I think there’s hope for the world.




Part II: A Brief History Out of Time




The Resurrection Begins
Sep 10 2016

There’s no easy way to explain the politics of “Heaven” at this point in history, unless you’re a “total nerd.” At least, there’s no complete or accurate way. That’s exactly the problem, the reason there’s this controversy over “physical magic.” The dilemma is, the “magic’s” results seem incontrovertible, but the actual physical mechanism is almost too subtle for people to understand why it’s really a scam. It’s subtle, and too horrifyingly, disgustingly cruel to be believed. I might know a thing or two about divine vengeance. I ate beans and broccoli before a Sunday wedding ceremony, once.

I’ve been called “She of the Ointment Jar.” Once, people carved my likeness in “alabaster” medicine and cosmetic jars. Some people call me “Bast.” Some people call me “Maurice.” There’s this one particular nut, or maybe a lab rat, from New Jersey who prefers “Bastet,” which is acceptable if you’re him or Indiana Jones.

Only this one little red eyed “lab rat,” out of every soul on the planet, is likely to see “physical magic” work consistently. If it doesn’t work, we kill him. It’s kind of like testing cosmetics by dabbing them directly into an animal’s eyes. If he survives to see miracles happen, we get clear skin, and smooth hair, and magic in a bottle, not really thinking about how many innocent, conscious animals’ tears it took before we paid fifty dollars for it in the supermarket because a fashion magazine told us we were ugly, obese offenses to all that is beautiful and good if we didn’t buy it.

Confused, yet? If there is somehow popular confusion and disagreement about global climate change and evolution, then there is absolutely no hope for a crying lab rat.

Bear with me: we’re gonna go over the relevant chapter in the physics textbook. I read it, at some point in the past hundred years or so. Maybe you’ve heard of “Schrödinger’s Cat.” I like cats, so I’m not going to put one through the thought experiment. I’m gonna put Schrödinger in his own damned murder box, for a change.

A cat places a scientist into a box which completely shields the space inside from all physical interaction with the outside. Inside the box, the cat also places a sealed vial of poison. The vial is attached to a device that contains a small bit of radioactive material and a radiation detector trigger, to break the vial. It’s not really important exactly how the trigger works, just that it’s a “fundamentally quantum random” death trigger. (The cat even made Schrödinger pet her and got a second breakfast out of him.) The cat also places a dead bird in the box for a reason Schrödinger kinda thinks he understands, but it was honestly half to say, “Fuck you in your stupid human box.”

The cat seals the box and takes a nap. Say that the expectation time is three minutes for the trigger mechanism to detect one radioactive particle breaking down, which opens the vial of poison. In that case, three minutes after the box is sealed, Schrödinger is in a “fifty-fifty” superposition of breathing and not breathing the poison, and the cat is hungry. That is, on the face of one relatively literal interpretation of quantum theory, Schrödinger is simultaneously dying and safe, but the cat is definitely just hungry.

Why can’t this really mean that there’s just a “fifty-fifty” chance that Schrödinger is alive or dead? What’s special about this fancy-schmancy “superposition”?

If Schrödinger were a single fundamental particle prepared an equivalent way, his different superposed states would be able to interact to produce an “interference pattern” that would not be possible if the particle or the scientist in the box with a (definitely) dead bird were just in a simple “fifty-fifty” binary ignorance of state to us. In some sense, either by multiple parallel quantum worlds, or something arguably more exotic, like faster than light signalling by a “pilot wave” containing both states, both states must effectively exist simultaneously in at least the sense that they may interfere. Spooky. Even “spoopy,” perhaps.

Multiple interpretations of the principle of superposition as it applies to this case have been forwarded over the years. The first popular approach was basically to deny, deny, and deny its reality, at least for “things” as large as Schrödinger or the dead bird. The “Copenhagen Interpretation” says that superposition has to break down somewhere between the microscopic scale and the scale of human events. It might be safe to say at this point in time that this idea of “breakdown,” or “wave function collapse,” is redundant with how we expect the world we see to behave without it. “Copenhagen interpretation” has fallen at least slightly out of majority favor. The cat didn’t like it, for one thing. She wouldn’t touch any part of it at all, except for the box it came in.

This leaves us with a kind of a broke-down, smelly petting zoo full of post-Copenhagen ontologies explaining how and whether superposition applies to things as big as kitty cats and your girlfriend’s last lover. The internet is your friend, if you want to hear about the experiments with bigger, sexier things. Systems of billions of electrons in superconducting rings have been put into superposition. Packets of two or more particles of light have been “interfered” while superposed between different positions in space.

Am I boring you yet? Are you secretly looking at cat memes on your phone behind your textbook? “Can I haz naps?” Bear with me, class, for Jesus.

If Schrödinger genuinely exists in both states, what does he experience? After three minutes sealed in the box, “one of him,” or one or many physically possible versions of him, would experience painful, inexorable cat vengeance. Another three-ish minutes later, that one would be dead from poisoning. “Another” Schrödinger would recall about six minutes without the poisoning triggering; the dead recall nothing at all.

The chance of a longer wait for death is always nonzero;  a portion of the box’s wave function always contains him alive, if he experiences all parts of the wave function in parallel. Hours pass. A short time after the vial breaks in any given case, Schrödinger can no longer recall his death, or anything at all, but he remains in (separate, exclusive) conscious memory of each of the unlikely worlds where the vial did not break. He wishes the box wasn’t blocking the lab WiFi. He considers eating the dead bird. He holds off, but as time passes he becomes more and more sure that macroscopic superposition is real and that he shouldn’t have put so many thousands of cats through this “silly” experiment. Hours later, the cat is more than ninety nine percent likely to open the box to find a dead Schrödinger and still somehow manage to get the scientist to immediately feed her. Paradoxically, when the box is opened and the dust settles on all of Schrödinger’s likely demises, from his viewpoint, he is only likely to recall his statistically ‘miraculous’ survival, or else nothing at all. The cat rests assured that, when the vanishingly small fraction of Schrödinger’s wave function that survives breaks out, the cat can feign innocence, and no one will ever believe that Schrödinger’s survival is proof of superposed quantum macroscopic worlds and the cat’s hidden agenda of severe, yet adorable, psychological torture of all humans. Not even Schrödinger is likely to believe it, despite his ordeal.

What about the dead bird? This was actually the cruelest part of the cat’s plan. Hours later, or even days, the cat knows he will probably open the box to find Schrödinger dead. However, if Schrödinger emerges alive, and the bird is still dead, the cat will kill Schrödinger anyway. If Schrödinger makes it out alive, and the bird has resurrected, the cat will let Schrödinger live, because the cat would never miss an opportunity to challenge and manipulate Schrödinger’s identity as a scientist at its very core, if the scientist is to live at all. Understand that the common housecat is actually the absolutely perfect murder machine, never failing to end the life of its intended victim. (Scientists in the room–not many of you, though–realize that every time you point out a difference like between “perfect” and “arbitrarily accurate,” at least to a layman, your funding shrinks, by the way.) You see, when Schrödinger’s likelihood of survival drops to one in a billion, or one in a trillion, or one in a trillion, trillion, trillion, the cat has proof that all physically possible quantum outcomes occur in superposition, including the utterly improbable resurrection of a bird the cat killed, herself.

Killing the scientist makes the bird no more likely to revive. However, it makes the scientist more likely recall a “miracle” that might shake his identity fundamentally, or else he recalls nothing at all. (Ask a cat god how evil cats are.) This is the principle at the core of “physical magic.” If you don’t understand it—and I can’t blame you, human—then at least understand how convoluted and confused the political debate over this fact of “physical magic” has become as a result, and say a prayer for “Jesus.” Grant me this: I have seen this poor “lab rat” survive the “quantum suicide experiment” to incalculably small odds of survival. That makes my luck even better than his, because my survival does not depend on it. Though, that should make us both wonder.

I keep a close eye on this anomaly of a man. Most nights, you’d forget God is trying to entirely dismantle his identity in all regards.

On a night like any other, he thought absently, ‘When are you gonna crack the penis joke, Bastet?’

“I’ll crack a peener exactly when I’m damned well ready, H. P. Lovecraft,” I said to him.

He was just playing video games, to the untrained eye. He was over a friend’s house.

“Alright—smoke?” asked Dave.

Jake didn’t even look up from one of the thirty two electronic sources of distraction he was constantly engaged in. “Yeah, I think so,” he said.

Will fiddled with a lighter. “I’m ready,” he said.

Dan shut down his game. “Yeah, why not?” he said.

Each person in the room had a counterpart I could “see,” in a place out of space. It’s kinda like a soul, except made out of a distributed computational state in our brains, rather than unicorn farts and bullshit. We, these “memetic” counterparts, these “souls,” perhaps, are effectively immortal. We’re not necessarily one-to-one, though. I saw them come to attention to prepare to fall into burning rings of fire in parallel.

“You wanna smoke, Bastet?” asked Will’s counterpart.

“Nah, you know I’m just babysitting him,” I said.

“So are we,” Jake’s “inner” responded.

They lit up, and Dan became nervous for no clear reason, like he often does. Will’s inner brought up the interface that had been installed into Dan’s inner, kinda his virtual immortal “soul,” the last time he was hospitalized, and Will started to tap something in. I tugged on Will’s inner’s “hand.”

“—Don’t do that,” I snapped.

“He’s obviously uncomfortable,” said Will’s inner. “Why shouldn’t he have the benefit of the very technology we derived from his soul?”

“…Because I, and his lower, have told you a thousand times, that doesn’t work how you think it does,” I said.

“…Made me a mint on stocks the other day,” said Jake.

“I’m amazed that they let you get away with that,” said Will, “because the government is using him at the same time to keep Syria and ISIS from boiling over, with a little nudge here and there.”

“I tend to believe his lower’s interpretation of the mechanism, though,” said Dave’s inner. “The point isn’t whether it works so much as how.”

“Except, if you believe his explanation,” I said, “the point might very well be how likely it is to work any given time, despite the apparent success to date. We might just be in his personal Hell, and it’s all he could ever know.”

The ring filtered single-file back into the house and debated which video game to play.

Will’s inner said, “…But that’s extremely unlikely, at least from our perspective, he even says.”

“…Unless we’re caught up in it, in terms of our dependence on him,” I said.

“That’s not even how it works,” Will’s inner said.

The group settled on “Dead-On Golf.”

“Look,” said Will’s inner,” we tweak his soul biology in a particular way and miracles come out, indefinitely. Why isn’t it easy enough to accept that it’s because he has the biggest metaphysical dick on the planet?”

Dave’s inner said, “He’s told us a billion times that he’s not the Creator and that there isn’t one.”

Jake’s inner said, “I’ve seen him start and stop wars by raw will, move storms, contract and expand the oil supply—”

“—No, you haven’t,” mouthed Dan’s lower silently, as Jake completed his swing.

Everyone in the room, on both planes, looked at him with unsettled expressions for a few seconds.

“See?” said Jake. “That’s what I mean. He plays it down, but he’s just lying.”

Dave’s inner shrugged. “Let’s not forget what Astral locale he hails from,” he said.

“Then it’s that!” shouted Jake’s inner, as Jake fist-pumped at his excellent on-green. “Hell was hiding world’s biggest uranium mine, and he fucking ate it and got superpowers! He found the damned crash-landed alien mother ship and went full Borg.”

“I wish,” I said, “but that honestly makes even less sense to me, at this point.”

“Bastet, I’m calling bullshit,” said Will. “We hit him like a piñata with the biggest guns we have, and goddamned physical magic comes out, and he unconsciously dodges every bullet. Who even cares how it happens?! We’d have to be fucking fucked in the head not to leverage it to our maximum advantage.”

“…Unless he’s actually the only one likely to observe us observing it,” said Dave’s inner, “and we only continue to see it because there’s some tiny quantum probability of his survival that comes contingent on our ‘miracle,’ so we never believe him so long as he’s alive.”

The room congratulated Dave on his “birdie.”

“Why would that work?” asked Jake’s inner.

“We pick a target physical result,” said Dave’s inner, “and we kill him unless it happens. He only observes worlds where we don’t kill him. It actually doesn’t make the event any more likely to occur at all. However, it makes him much more relatively likely to see the target effect happen, as a fraction of the worlds he survives to observe. All it depends on is whether the ‘miracle’ is more likely than the failure of the killing devices we have in place, or else the chance that we’ll consciously stop turning his thumbscrews for one reason or another—and a bit of luck.”

“I don’t get it,” said Will’s inner. “Then he’ll live to see the Resurrection. Whatever.”

“He’ll probably have to survive the zombie Apocalypse first,” said Dave’s inner, as his lower cracked up.

The rest of the room went quiet.

After a few seconds, Jake’s inner asked, “We’re quiet because of the actual physical zombies that started to pop up when we tried to start The Resurrection with Dan magic, aren’t we?”

Dave and Dan’s lowers both cracked up, this time.

“Alright, look, those were weird,” said Will’s inner, “but he raised goddamned zombies! I still maintain that those people would have fully reconstituted if we kept pressing the damned Dan magic.”

“Dude,” said Jake, “would that have happened first, or would we have been overrun with zombies?”

“What if every one of the humans ends up in a personal Hell like him,” asked Dave’s inner, “where everyone else thinks he or she is the Creator and the world implodes over it?”

Will’s inner said, “Billions of people died in totally predictable ways before he came along, and never did we somehow get immortality and physical magic out of it.”

I asked, “So what’s different about Dan, then, specifically?”

“He’s the true God,” said Will’s inner.

“No, I’m definitely not,” mouthed Dan’s lower.

“Shut up—you are!” said Will’s inner. “Or you fucking ate him, or you sucked off his jizz of immortality or some bullshit like that!”

“She’s a ‘She’,” mouthed Dan.

“You don’t even believe in Her,” said Jake’s inner.

“Nope,” he mouthed.

I said, “Sort of ironic that he keeps saying that, isn’t it?”

“Then how the fuck does it work, Bast?” asked Will’s inner. “Supposedly you’ve studied it. Tell me simply, in your infinite erudition, how this is possible.”

“I’ve been debating between two plausible scenarios,” I told him, “and both imply that this happens to basically every human on the planet, eventually, given the observational and experimental evidence we already have.”

“What are they?” asked Will’s inner.

“Every time we try to kill him unless we get our desired miracle, and he survives, he doesn’t actually survive except in an extremely tiny fraction of worlds. He never knows the difference, effectively, because we hide it from him. Every world in which he survives, our belief in miracles is reaffirmed. We make him play Russian Roulette indefinitely. If he loses, he doesn’t see our disproof. He’s guaranteed to win in at least one world, and that world contains us experiencing ‘miracles’ and never believing him.”

“The chances are infinitesimal,” said Jake’s inner. “Consider Occam’s Razor.”

“Dan pissed off Allah,” I said. “These ‘miracles’ are also one of the biggest things left to support Al’s reign. It’s the perfect revenge, if you’re a sadistic and desperate despot. So long as Dan survives, Al rules.

“Infinitesimal…” said Will’s inner.

“…But guaranteed,” said Dave’s.

“What’s the other scenario?” asked Jake’s.

“What do you think would happen if he died?” I asked.

“We’d be totally fucked, at this point,” said Jake’s inner with a laugh.

“…Like, World War III,” said Will’s inner.

“Do you think we’d be personally high on the list of early targets,” I asked, “or even just in range of a nuke detonation in New York City?”

Dave’s inner thought for a second and said, “So we’re also much more likely to survive, at this point, only in those worlds where he does.”

“I’m literally in Hell,” mouthed Dan.

“What are you doing with your mouth?” asked the actual physical Jake.

“Casting spells,” said Dan’s lower, lining up a golf swing.

“You know what?” said Will’s inner. “This is how much I believe you or care.”

Will put a half-figurative, half-literal, “gun to Dan’s head,” and the shot was perfect. Dan scored a hole in one. The scoreboard came up, and Will was also “miraculously” down a stroke on his total, which none of the lowers seemed to notice.

“I think you might have just started World War III over a video game, in a set of quantum parallel worlds that are trillions of times more likely than the one where Dan scores a hole in one in this game, man,” said Jake’s inner.

“I neither believe that nor care, though he does suck at it,” said Will’s inner. “The damned universe probably is a fucking video game.”

“…and, thusly, the zombie Apocalypse began,” said Dan, rolling his eyes.

“…The Resurrection, Dan,” said Dave’s lower. “You mean ‘The Resurrection.'”

Nobody ever acted like it was weird, when the “miracles” started happening. It wasn’t weird, when Dan pretended he didn’t hear all the little coy admissions he should be so desperate to gather, like beads from a broken rosary, but “reproducibility” implies something else, to a lab rat.




A Brief History Out of Time
Aug 12 2016

The irony of passing the “veil” between life and death is that something comes after, yet nothing is revealed. The select meet “God” personally, each essentially in her or his own image. “God” sits on an ornate throne of gold and recites “Footprints,” just as you would expect. Or “God” meditates on a snow capped mountaintop and might wait an eternity to crack a penis joke. Or “God” weighs one’s heart against a feather on a loaded balance to justify even harsher punishment in “Heaven” than on Earth for the happenstance of a lifetime of hardship and inequity. “God” shakes hands and makes deals, like any of us, because “God” is basically a democracy when “God” works and a dictatorship when “God” can get away with it.

Human, why would a supposedly omnipotent being care to demand your praise, or attempt to micromanage your punishments and rewards, unless he were rather the pharaoh or divine king who depended on your reverence? Worship the god that admits her limitation and humanity instead, or—better—don’t. There’s no great enlightenment here, nor is there perfect poetic justice, nor is there finality. If “God” exists, how can we feel more than the true but tiny love of an ant for you? It is neither my desire nor my place to reward and punish the ants. I look up from Earth, and I wonder whether the gods of other civilizations feel similarly about the gods of this backwards little planet.

I used to take it slightly seriously. Like, “God” was a big deal. That was about five thousand years ago. People were throwing orgies in my honor. I still believe that’s one of the most appropriate ways to show appreciation for how we meddle in your lives, or at least the most likely to get a prayer or two answered. You probably bummed a smoke from “God” at Mardi Gras in ’87. I’ll bet it was a Parliament. You’re going to Hell if you smoke, by the way, and Satan has told me to make it clear that they only stock Pall Malls there, so you should be worried, apparently. I haven’t smoked a cigarette since ’87, so I wouldn’t know. I died, that year, so I decided it was a good time to quit.

“So, when are you quitting?” I asked him as he took a deep, desperate drag.

‘Bastet, you’re not wrong to ask that,’ he thought, ‘particularly right now, but, by the same consideration, it’s either suck this or suck a fuck, and I’m clean outta fucks to burn.’

“Dan, you gotta stay hopeful,” I whispered to him.

He visually scanned his dark corner of the hospital parking lot for Russian spies before he spoke.

“Bastet, can you pull some strings?” he asked.

“I would,” I told him, “but I’m not sure that I know anyone whom you don’t that could help with this.”

“Except you don’t have a public reputation as a borderline terrorist,” he said, and spit.

I sighed. “Oh, Dan, it’s not like…”

He gave me a look like only two people in this world could make.

“O… Okay, yeah, you have a point,” I had to admit, “or just, like, a terrorist, without the ‘borderline’ part.”

Dan’s face went flat. Then, his eyes started to water.

“Katie, he’s my best friend,” he said. “He’s the only one who even took the paper I wrote on quantum gravity months ago seriously.”

“I took it seriously,” I wanted him to know.

“Katie, then he’s the only flesh and blood person whom I could reference in public without appearing any crazier.” The tears rolled down his cheeks. “We’d talk about math. We’d play chess, and he’d beat me nine times out of ten. We’d play go, and he’d beat me every single fucking time! He’d call bullshit whenever I deviated from mathematical rigor in my science, yet he was always still supportive and infinitely fucking patient! I acknowledged him in the paper, Katie.”

Exhaustion caught up with me for a moment, and I didn’t know what to say. “He claims he didn’t make any notable contribution to the paper.”

“The paper wouldn’t exist without him,” he said.

“So you’re supposed to be Jesus and Einstein, now?” I asked. (I meant it to come across a certain way, but I cringed a little listening to myself.)

“You’re at least five thousand years old,” he said. “I’d be fairly disgusted if not a single one of your incarnations was a doctor of physics.”

“It’d have to be one in the past hundred years for that particular subject matter—wouldn’t it, Boltzmann?” I said. “Maybe I’ve stayed abreast though, to your point.”

“So, am I right?” He crossed his arms.

“We’ll all find out after the Apocalypse,” I said.

“I’ll stop it, again,” he fired back.

“…Pretty sure that was just you getting drunk and pretending to save the world,” I told him.

He muttered, “Then I’ll just get drunk and pretend not to, next time.”

“Unfortunately, it’s moot if no one ever reads the paper,” I said.

He choked up. “…Which is just one of the trillion reasons I can’t lose Adam.”

I tried my best to give him the hug he needed that I couldn’t physically give him and the carefully measured validation that his asshole of an advisor never would. (…As I carefully measured how I could make it look like an accident.)

I said, “The last journal waited a month to reject it without explanation because they couldn’t find anything obviously and fatally wrong with it, like I couldn’t, except for the letters next to your name, of course.”

He looked around again, furtively: still no spies. He actually put his arms out into the air around where he “imagined” I was. (I might or might not have been floating a foot to the left.)

“You know, Dan,” I said with a glint in my eye, “it’d be a real shame if your sorry excuse for an advisor—”

“—You finish that sentence,” he said, “and they put me in the beigest place in the world with the shittiest mind altering drugs in the world for a very, very long time.”

“You never have to say that aloud, Dan,” I reminded him.

We both laughed hopeless, emotionally spent giggles. His best friend was dying. We both knew, for reasons basically no one else physically in that hospital could suspect, that was a multifaceted problem.

He released his death grip on thin air. ‘Have you seen his inner, in all this?’ he wondered of me. ‘I honestly don’t even know how this translates to him.’

“Well, it depends,” I said. I chose my words and felt their implications, one by one: “Brain injuries in particular can give us a pretty bad jolt, when we’re incarnate. The recovery prospects and timeline are a little different, for complicated reasons that you might have some idea about by now. Um, you, in this case, given how well you know each other, and your friends in there, are actually rather important to him in that regard, right now.” ‘I know how bad this is,’ I couldn’t tell him. “It’s not completely unlike how he needs you in the flesh to get through this, except, as far as his inner goes, you might actually be helping him in a more direct sort of capacity like he needs a doctor for in the physical realm, whether you realize it or not. I mean, we have doctors—”

“—So you mean, rather, like a tissue or blood donor?” he asked.

I didn’t know how to say anything other than, “Um, well, basically. Yes, like that.”

‘…And I’m sure our inners are lining up,’ he thought.

I didn’t even really know Adam, personally, but I started to cry. “Yes, you all are, Dan.”

I felt someone tap me on the shoulder.

“We need to talk with you,” whispered the tapper. “It might be time critical,” he added.

“Dan, there’s something I need to do for Adam right now,” I said.

‘Odin thinks I can’t hear him, doesn’t he?’ thought Dan.

Odin recoiled like he smelled something rank. He pointed a finger. “After we trained you, you’d better hear me, Jesus!”

“I trust you,” Dan said softly. ‘…But please, please, no zombies,’ he added in his head.

“Of course, ‘no zombies’!” said Odin. “Get in there, your friends need you!”

Dan pointed a menacing finger that had touched more gods than vaginas. “No fucking zombies,” he growled aloud, and he turned to head in.

Without Dan to worry about, for the moment, I divided my whole attention between the Three Stooges. Odin looked grim. Thor looked guilty. Loki only ever looked this nonchalant when he was scrambling a covert preemptive strike.

I didn’t even know what was wrong, but I had already decided to kill Loki first. “So, start explaining in total truth and detail,” I said.

“Okay,” said Odin, “look, first thing: no zombies.”

“…Like, ninety percent sure, no zombies,” said Thor. Odin looked at him agape.

“No, absolutely no zombies,” said Loki. “We know the procedure went better than anyone could have even imagined, but that’s exactly why he was able to up and split so fast.”

I shot daggers at Loki and then turned to Thor. I asked gently, “Tell me the truth, Thor.”

Thor pussyfooted for a second as we all watched him expectantly.

“…Like… ninety seven percent, no zombies,” he said timidly.

“Forty percent of your soul dead soldiers were effectively turned into ‘zombies,’ if I remember correctly,” I said. I was fuming.

Odin grimaced. “The figure you’re recalling from the trial, Bastet,” he said, “was honestly about forty two percent—but that was over the entire history of the experiments!” he shouted. “The subject matter experts agreed that we had achieved a reliable seventeen percent ‘zombie’ side effect rate on the soul resurrection method before people found out and the courts got involved with—”

“It was a war crime!” I screamed. “You mean to to tell me—”

“—Seventeen percent!” Thor bellowed. “They never dreamed of it! Practically every one of our soldiers begged to opt in, anyway, and all that is exactly why they commuted our sentences! One of the doctors actually called it a ‘miracle’!”

“Bastet,” Odin started talking, fast, “the fact is, due to Dan’s connection with us, and Shiva’s connection with Dan, we had—perfectly legitimate—preexisting agreements with Shiva—”

“—But why he would ever—” I started to say.

“—Because eighty three fucking percent—that’s why!” said Odin with an indignant look. “The man is a mathematician, but it doesn’t take one!”

I was already thinking about what I was going to have to tell Dan. I bit my lip. Diplomat face on, Bastet…

“How sure are you,” I asked, “honestly, that—”

Loki exploded. “Not a single one of those so called ‘zombies’ could have ever bolted in a fraction of a second and covered his tracks expertly behind him, like he did, but that might make perfect sense if the procedure was a total success and you just let us explain.”

I relented. Every face was haggard and wearing a look of sincere concern, at this point.

“I’m listening,” I said.

“We need you to find him,” said Loki. “Kali and the rest of the family obviously have their hands full, on top of being completely exhausted. We need to go back into the hospital and suture up the connection to his lower as best we can, still. You have sufficient privileges to look for him in places that even Dan’s inner might not be welcome, especially.”

“I’ll get right on it,” I said.

“Listen, first,” snapped Loki.

I felt his military grade privacy barrier go up around us.

He said, “Now, you know as well as any of us that the damage that was done to Adam’s soul has virtually no chance of being primarily due to his physical accident. It’s horrible, but people’s brains get practically disintegrated on a daily basis, and yet it almost never causes damage to the inner or the soul to the extent of the state that we found him in. In all likelihood, that’s exactly why he ran and hid for his immortal life the instant he was conscious again. You be careful. Shit’s really freakin’ rotten in Denmark, tonight. You read me?”

He handed me something. “Dan’s inner gave me this to give to you. You activate it, and it’ll help protect you immediately as well as let him phase in to where you are nearly as quickly. I know you’re already no one to fuck with, but he’s one of us, and two are better. And, if the person behind this is exactly who I know we all already could guess it is, Dan knows practically his every shitty little parlor trick, probably even better than us.”

“Got it,” I said, turning over the device. “I activate this and get wrapped in a bubble so the guy I’ve babysat for ten years who can’t get over me can swoop in to save me with his big, muscular penis.”

Loki rolled his eyes. “It’s not like that,” he said. “He’s just the obvious choice to back you up, isn’t he?”

“We’re politicians,” I said, “not feudal warlords, some of us. But if I actually had a reason to put on a siege suit tonight, you’d better realize that Kali—”

“—You’re right,” he cut me off. “She’s ready to go on a killing spree, practically, but do you actually think that’s what she should be doing right now?”

“Point taken,” I conceded, putting the “call button” away. “She hears us, by the way.”

“Nah, not through this barrier,” said Loki.

“Don’t try to keep secrets from me tonight, you weaselly fucking little crumb bum, Loki!” said Kali from a place we couldn’t see.

“That wasn’t possible,” said Loki matter-of-factly. “She’s cheating.”

“You find me proof of who did it, and I hack his fucking dick off with a rusty meat cleaver!” screamed Kali from somewhere unseen.

“Is she in the hospital room, right now?” asked Loki. “I can’t find the damned communication tether. Is she just screaming that loud?”

“You bring me his fucking sack, Bastet!” Kali yelled.

“Can I keep the balls?” asked Loki.

“I keep the balls!” shouted Kali.

“I’d like to see someone make a constellation out of that,” said Loki.

“I’m gonna go find Shiva, now,” I said, as I phased out of there. I didn’t even know where I was going, yet, so I popped out in a low aether basically down the street, but that was a little too intense.

You’ll have the opportunity to travel faster than the speed of light again, someday. At this point in history, it’ll get you out of awkward parties, but it used to be mostly a slow one way trip, continually into Earth’s past. Ask a physicist why. It sounds strange, but, for a few of our millenia, we couldn’t figure out why you folks lived “backward.” In a way, it was a matter of perspective. It was always obvious that we could interact in a chronologically sensible enough way when we were incarnate, but the mechanism is honestly still only about as well understood as your brains are understood by your experts.

(By the way, if you happen to know something about special relativity, Dan once pointed out a really intriguing heurism to me that might help you understand: start in a frame with two tachyons traveling opposite directions and Lorentz boost to the frame of either one. Perhaps there are dragons hiding in plain view, just on the other side of the veil of light. We might or might not have countless defunct, embarrassing models of when and how your garbage becomes fine China. As well, it’s troubling that we can see our dead relatives again, and you can’t in the same way. The meaning of all this is occult.)

I went to Mount Kailash, and the hands of the clock turned backwards. It was the most obvious place to start, to me. I saw “Adam,” of course, but not our Adam “here” and “now.” I watched him play with Ganesh and Parvati. (…That is, “Parvati” most of the time, turned “Kali” when he came home drunk, some nights.) The happiness radiated from his face. At intervals, I watched him meditate so perfectly still for so long that it disoriented my sense of direction in time. I watched petitioners walk backwards up the mountain to meet him and down again, as major religions marched from tomb to womb to mere potential. I saw Shiva poke his feelers in by memory or anticipation from distant times and places, but Adam was not here. I sped my clock back to the Cretaceous, just in case, until the mountains didn’t exist and the landscape was unrecognizable. No Adam. No, madam.

I phased into the gravity well anomaly for a minute. (That thing is harder to explain.) I phased out of it to find my timing was decent: I was only about 30 years early. In fact, then, I supposed I was right on time.

From the edge of the anomaly, I poked a special sort of “tether” out towards a home in the Republic of Venezuela. I stepped a little deeper into the anomaly, and the clock turned forward.

Lusinchi was on the television, then John Paul II. The bolivar artificially tumbled. A family took a plane to the United States, and a young Adam gleefully shouted, “Turbulencia! Turbulencia!” I giggled at the expense of the other passengers. His parents were technically skilled, and they had a good life with Ivan and Adam in Randolph, New Jersey. The boys grew by the minute. Adam played chess at summer camp with—is that who I think it is? Two too smart kids slacked in the back of Mr. Pecoraro’s science class, where every test was pop. They both got “four-point-‘o’s”—in that class, at least. Ivan’s hair was long and flaming. Naughty, naughty things ensued. There were lots of familiar faces, suddenly, and lots of questionable decisions. Out of the corner of my eye, I watched myself make out with some “loser” for about nine months and yet never quite make it to “home base.” Oh… Dan… You’re in and out of hospitals. Adam is, too, for seizures. A younger me says one of the hardest things she’s ever had to say, to Dan, and it’s all up and down. Him and Adam are at different colleges. Ivan and his father go to the Dominican Republic to study medicine, and I can’t keep track of it all. Ivan… That’s not fair. That’s not fair to anyone! To lose a son, and a brother… Adam’s family is heartbroken. Adam goes to graduate school, though, and so does Dan! Those bastards get to Dan, in a minute. Adam is a little luckier, but it’s hardly a matter of just luck. Dan’s writing me poetry he’ll never know I read. The world nearly explodes, a few more times. Adam has another seizure, years later. His friends are there, but then a second later—

I blast out of the well as I drop the tether. For a moment that lasted hours, I saw Adam on the floor of his bedroom, motionless and alone. Kali is frantically calling the police from another state. She might have saved him. I don’t know if there was anything else friends or family could have done. It was painfully close, but it wasn’t quite our Adam “here” and “now.” I watched him flee a hospital bed, too quick and too enigmatically careful in covering his tracks to chase.

I landed in some middle aether, panting and crying. Adam had a grand mal seizure on a Saturday evening, in his apartment near his graduate school. His wife was away for the night. She called him and couldn’t reach him, but Adam liked to take naps at around that time, and he hated not being trusted to his autonomy. He fell face forward onto his arms, probably from his bed. He was unconsciousness and alone for hours, likely, as his wife desperately tried to reach him by phone. The muscles in his arms began to break down from restriction of blood flow and oxygen, and the breakdown products taxed his kidneys. The lack of oxygen damaged his cerebellum, and his brain in general. He’s recovering from Lyme disease. He’s epileptic. If it wasn’t for the heroic concern of his wife, calling the apartment management and the police relentlessly, he would probably already be dead.

Dan considers Adam to be his oldest, closest, best friend. I know why, now.

Maybe it isn’t beside the point that the damage to Adam’s counterpart on our plane went far beyond the typical for his physical injuries. I wasn’t lying, when I said brain injuries, in particular, could give us a “jolt,” for reasons that might be clear by now, but the extent was extremely unusual. I can think of another unmentioned, unmentionable reason why Shiva would have taken the care and the risk to make prearrangement with the Aesir and Vanir, and perhaps that’s the thread I should have started pulling in the first place.

On our plane, there is a quiet and usually deserted structure rather surgically positioned at a balance point between the edge of the gravity well anomaly I mentioned and a region of free flowing “forward” time for us. This structure has a very particular purpose, much debated. By a mechanism that might be obvious now, but will assuredly be obvious soon enough, the purpose of the structure is “Resurrection.” The media dialectic might convince one that the chance of perfect restitution of all human physical bodies by this structure, or device, is a rather democratic “fifty fifty.” That is, everything works out just perfectly or else nothing survives.

Dan hates this structure. Adam hates this structure. I hate this structure, yet here I am.

I situated myself a distance past the balance point on the free flowing side and watched. Things get a little wonky on the rare occasion that this structure is in use. I watched as, a couple of years ago from our lowers’ current perspective, the structure suddenly got very, very crowded. People prayed and un-prayed ancient, secret prayers that read forward and backward—depending on which side of the aisle you were on—for days, in time circuits. The point was to never, ever stop praying to the Abrahamic god at this neighborhood in time, right where the world was meant to end by nuclear holocaust, for as long as it took “God” to become powerful enough to perfectly restore the physical human bodies of the devout. I’ve embalmed people, yet I find this little ritual to be exactly as heebie jeebie, creepy crawly as it might sound to you.

(By the way, I assure you this will never work, because, believe it or not, neither your nor our physics allow this feat, with one critically pie-in-the-sky, Hail-Mary, infinitesimally improbably little debatable caveat, and not even the Abrahamic “God” can change this fact. However, many people have been able to lie and base long and successful political careers on it, we all know.)

I stepped to the other side of the time flow, to be sure I hadn’t missed anything. To my great pleasure, somewhere in New Jersey, of all places, some laughable nut ran drunkenly around his parents’ backyard talking to himself and, somehow, managed to become the only known historical example of human scale macroscopic quantum tunneling, in the process. The “devout” were perplexed. There was nothing strange about this. “You-Can-Call-Me-Al” shit a brick and tried to pass it off as a miracle. This virtually impossible sequence of events was fixed in our history, now. Nothing could be done to change it, anymore. I could play this on repeat, again, and again, and again, and again.

The prayer and its reverse, like a Satanic backtrack on “Stairway to Heaven,” continued awkwardly for a bit. (I wouldn’t be surprised if that was where “Al” got the idea.) “Al” composed himself and recited his preordained contingency speech in stereo time channels. No nuclear holocaust today, folks, I’m so sorry. Lucifer ruined it, again. Shucks. There was some note of finality in the prayers, and gradually the crowd dispersed. There was no sign of Shiva.

I watched from afar until the structure was basically deserted, again, as I considered my next move. I thought I generally knew where Adam was. I was going to have break some laws, or at least defend my actions’ legality after the fact.

I needed an armor suit. Rather, I already suspected I needed the armor suit—the big one. I triggered the activation sequence. The plates wrapped snugly as the generator units came on, and the heads up display flashed under the visor.

The artificial intelligence took about four seconds to boot. “Council member Bastet,” it said evenly, “peacetime lockout is in effect.”

“Override peacetime lockout,” I said.

“Please state the reason,” the “A.I.” prompted.

“…Immediate S class threat to council member Shiva’s immortal life.”

“Please clarify,” the A.I. said without audible concern.

Anxious, I said, “He’s traveled within a short space-time interval of the anomaly’s singularity to sabotage Allah’s ‘Ark.” His lower is brain damaged, and he’s recovering from major soul surgery.”

“Evaluating…” said the A.I.. The next three seconds lasted a century.

“…Credible just cause, time critical,” it reported, “code 003. Overriding peacetime lockout.” As the generator units kicked into full operation it asked, “How may I assist you?”

“I need to find the head of his timeline, within an hour or two of fleeing the hospital,” I said. “I suspect he’s within about a week of the point where the anomaly touches down on Earth, maybe a bit before when the ‘Ark’ will come into use. He would have to be incarnate as his current lower, at that time on Earth, but I suspect he’s targeting potential timelines where his lower and inner are both effectively permanently incapacitated.”

Shiva was playing dice against the odds of ending up a vegetable, I was guessing, and he had me playing, too.

“Approximately 330 macroscopically distinguishable future timelines fit those criteria,” said the A.I.

“Ah, c’mon…” I said. “He’s either still trying to cover his tracks, or he has as little idea as any of us do which ones are likely to matter, or both.”

I thought for a second. “How many of those is Lucifer incarnate in, in his current lower?”

“Six,” reported the A.I..

I did a double take. “For Christ’s sake, Dan…”

“One of these timelines appears to contain what could be Shiva’s current head, with significant injuries beyond his accident,” the A.I. added.

“Get us there,” I told it.

“Affirmative,” the A.I. responded, and the propulsion system blasted.

“Council member Bastet,” the A.I. intoned cooly as we phased through possibly the harshest environment on the Astral we had the technology to reach, “the void beast appears to be attacking council member Shiva at our intended destination.”

“…Practically on Allah’s Armageddon throne? When the beast is safely trapped behind that barrier, like ninety nine percent of the time, that we built at an expense of billions? When did it escape?” I asked.

“About thirty two hours ago,” said the A.I.

“Wow, I hadn’t heard!” I said as we dropped out of long distance travel phasing mode and into evasive phasing, and I was already blasting the fucking thing with the primary arm cannons. “A friend of mine was really badly hurt, about twenty four hours ago, and then he came here, where no one could find him, and he must have just walked straight into the damn thing!”

“It appears to have arrived minutes after he did,” said the A.I. credulously.

“No shit!” I yelled, as I blasted and dodged away. “Because Shiva would have realized that, of course, if the head was already here, or the history report from his armor showed it anywhere near the place!”

Speak of the Devil, the beast recoiled from a square hit in its projection center to reveal Adam’s inner on the ground below. He was wearing some discretionary use armor model, probably off grid, that was practically torn to shreds. I flashed him Dan’s call button, and he knew what to do.

Now he was encased in something sturdy, at least. Backup would be here any second.

“Council member Bastet,” the A.I. addressed me as I braced myself against a wall to fire the big cannons, “are you implying that this was council member Allah’s doing?”

“No!” I shouted as the first hard shell was released, “Why, do you think it’s a little convenient and obviously motivated?” It connected; I think I winded it.

Lucifer flew in like a proverbial “bat out of Hell” in some rinky dink homebrew suit—I thought, til I saw the recoil. He’d aimed for a sensitive organ, and the beast howled.

I shot a communication tether over to him. “Get Kali!” I shouted down it.

He fired a few light rounds and… oh, you goddamned idiot.

It’d be impressive that he had already dimensionally folded the room in the ICU into the Doomsday Chapel, across vast intervals of time and space, if there weren’t dozens of undefended and critically injured people on the other side. Of course, Kali wasn’t even in it. The Aesir and Vanir were, though, and I never saw three people so immediately delighted to have a figurative portal to Hell open up right in front of them. They came out blasting rapid fire while other, sane people scrambled toward the periphery.

“Where’s Kali?!” shouted Dan’s inner.

“Waiting room!” their friend Shaun shouted back.

Of course, he folded the waiting room in next. Kali noticed immediately, and I never saw an armor go on so fast. More innocent bystanders scrambled, as I turned up the maximum charge on my biggest particle beam cannon.

For a minute, it was chaos. We beat the beast back far enough that Kali could grab Shiva, and he, her, and Dan went out the bathroom window, back into the hospital. The Norse were just taking off their limiters when my cannon hit capacity and discharged.

It was a square hit in the beast’s center or projection. With an ear piercing shriek, it fell over like an earthquake, and the chapel went quiet.

Loki looked back at me and pointed. “Your kill.”

“But I’m not dead, yet!” said Thor, pretending to talk with the thing’s mouth flaps.

“Not for long,” said Odin. “Let’s get it back behind the barrier.”

“I think I’ll go for a walk,” said Thor.

“It’s nearly as dead as that joke,” said Odin. “You come help us, Thor. They probably need her back at the hospital.”

“Fucking Christ,” was all I could think to say, as the suit disengaged.

“Were you?” asked Odin.

“Go to Hell,” I said, turning towards the dimensional fold.

“I have a vacation home, there!” called Odin after me. “It’s beautiful in October!”

I stepped through the fold, and Dan let it go. Kali overtook me with a surprise hug.

“I don’t really know you well, personally, but I have to thank you—thank you— from the bottom of my heart,” she said, turning to the room, “and all of you.”

“Anything I can do, Kali…” I replied.

There were fresh tubes already running in and out of Adam’s inner, as the medical team hovered and flitted. He was conscious, at least.

Someone I presumed to be a doctor addressed us. “The new wounds are relatively superficial,” he said. “Most of it is from the initial injury.”

The room breathed a collective sigh of relief.

“You can talk with him,” said the doctor.

We stood over the inner and lower, listening to his respiration and the steady rhythm of the machines attached to him. The lower was in a coma. The inner was beat up, nearly as bad.

No one spoke for a minute.

“I think…” Shiva started to speak, “we pushed back ‘t=0’ about… ten years, during that last scare with the war. I wasn’t… I wasn’t gonna let him get away with it!”

He was crying. “I still needed to be incarnate to… to…”

Kali gently hushed him. “…The safety mechanisms on the chapel, Adam.”

He said, “…Got me about halfway, with my clearance… Busted the other safety mechanisms and broke the ‘nuke’ and its trigger. If any was the right one… who knows.”

She said. “I wanna chew you out, but I just.. I…”

They were both crying. I looked around, and we all were.

“Who did this?!” demanded Kali.

“I…” said Adam, “I don’t have proof. I just don’t have proof.”

“Spoken like a true mathematician,” said Dan’s inner.

It’s strange how the pressure fell off the concern for “Adam’s” mortality in one regard and created this cognitive dissonance in the process, with the self same Adam still in a coma and on life support with bleak prospects for recovery. How did this happen? What could we do? Would he make it? I have been worshiped as a god, and I didn’t know. I never knew. I don’t know anyone who does, on Earth or in Heaven.

“God” did this to Adam, I couldn’t help but think. At least, he should have done more to prevent it. “God” shouldn’t let things like this happen, much less even make them happen.

I used to take it slightly seriously. Like, “God” was a big deal. That was before I realized that “God” hurts people like Adam every single day, or else just lets them get hurt, for no good cosmically significant reason, in total self assurance. That was before I got into politics.




The Riddle of the Sphinx
Sep 08 2015

Tube socks… Thousands, millions of tube socks, oscillating to the day-and-night cycle of the planet, coming on and off feet, on and off… hands, as googly-eyed puppets, watching me… watching me pick my nose… The fuck you looking at?! …This? …I bought it at Wegman’s. It cost me a hundred dollars, and I don’t even know what it is… Or maybe it cost me eight dollars and twenty seven cents, and I know exactly what it is… I pick up dead things with this… Havoc… Sexy goat-beast—

“GRRRRRR!”

My cat alarm growled at me, and I opened my eyes to face the dawn. It bothered me that I needed help getting up that morning—most days, I don’t—but he’d kept me past my bedtime with his addictive personality traits, again.

“What a fucking mess…” I thought to myself aloud, sighing and closing my eyes again. I counted to three, and I was on my feet.

It was barely even his fault, I told myself as I straightened the bed, and he kinda did us a solid. The least I could do was speak the truth for him, but he’ll fuck the whole thing up, I knew already.

I decided I’d give him a wake up call. He kept me waiting for an answer just long enough to remind me I’d been the one to break up with him and why.

He answered with a grunt.

“Get the fuck up,” I said, wondering to myself why I’d called him at all. “It’s nearly eight o’clock for our lowers. They’re gonna wanna talk with your incarnation, too.”

He sighed. “…Thanks,” he said. “Can I keep the tether open?”

I wondered if we had the bandwidth for him to see the infinitesimal rise of my eyebrow as my gaze wandered off, but it was moot if he was as unconscious as he usually was. “Yeah, sure,” I said. “You’re gonna watch me get dressed?”

“You’ve got a visual up?!” he said, and then he tweaked the fuck out of bed and onto the floor. I already knew he slept naked. (Since you’re gonna wonder, now, eight or nine, but it’ll never help him any…)

He came up from behind the bed a couple of seconds later in a gray European-style suit with a blood red silk shirt and a rose-patterned black and red tie. I thought about it for a moment, and I was in my own matching suit with a skirt hemmed a bit below the knee. Being a life form of pure thought takes all the fun out of risqué video chats with your psycho ex-boyfriends.

“No nemes or kalasiris?” he asked. “You’ve looked fabulous in them, lately,”

“It’s a civil court appearance, not a cultural festival,” I said, inspecting my outfit, “but I enjoy them again lately, too—thank you—or a stola. I like your ponytail, but I can’t decide if the goatee makes you look like Jesus or Satan.”

He grinned and fondled his moustache. Then, he laughed. “We look like the Wonder Twins,” he said.

“You picked a good color scheme, for how I feel today,” she said. “Just stand on the other side of the room from me.”

“You seem sweet on him, at times, at least,” he said.

“What’s he wearing?” I asked.

“He has the luxury of showing up in pajamas,” he said, pouring himself a cup of coffee. “Eris’ lower will show up in a twenty year old bathrobe, for chrissake.”

“Eris’ incarnation won’t be expected to testify, though, and it’s bad if he looks like the scraggly, drunken schizophrenic you really are in the flesh,” I said.

“They’ll think I’m crazier if he wears a suit,” he said, lighting his morning cigarette. “What’s your lower wearing?”

“As, if!” I said, feeling around in the “undercarriage” to at least make sure she wasn’t being raped by some other persistent, delusional “ex.”

His nose wrinkled. “How could my meat-puppet possibly be the only one involved in this?” he asked.

“You’re the only one of us crazy or desperate enough to send your meat straight into the grinder!” I yelled, impulsively crossing my arms.

“Do you blame me?” he asked.

I bit my lip. “…For his sake.”

I felt him out in his usual states. He was in the first place I looked, on the back steps to the garden with coffee and a cigarette, just like “big brother.”

I said, “I honestly think he doesn’t even know if you’re alive.”

“I want to assure him, but he’s rightly guarded, of his own volition,” he said.

I told him quietly, “I blame him slightly less than you.”

He scratched his temple. “Bastet, I guess I understand.”

I puckered my whole expression. “He writes better poetry than you,” I said.

He recoiled like I’d hooked him. “You’re welcome,” he said.

“Alright, we gotta get to court,” I said. “Your lower looks like a scumbag.”

“More like your smegma rag,” he said. We really have no manners here in Heaven’s public restroom.

“Sock puppet…” I said.

“What?” he asked.

“What goes on two socks with sneakers, three socks on business, and one sock with sandals?” I puzzled.

“I see what you did, there,” he said, “but nobody else would, which is the other reason you bought candles.”

“Triple wick…” I said.

“A vagina works both ways,” he said.

“So does an asshole, virgin,” I reminded him.

“Tell that to the judge,” he advised.

I materialized a prop set of thick black-rimmed glasses on my nose to take off for the sake of the pathos, and I rubbed my temple. Yeah, there was a reason I’d always loved him in the past tense.

Let me make this clear right now: there is no physically or magically possible scenario where I give away the life I’ve built for myself, for him or anyone, but, to his limited credit, he seems to basically understand and respect this, and he’s not a bad nut, in my book. The problem was convincing a judge of this. I counted the things I had going for me that were better than him, as we made our way to the court, but I admit that I only could have gone on for ten or or eleven times the transit, in his defense.

Loki’s smile was as wide as the dildo he had picked out for Dan’s legal opponent. It had been Loki’s suggestion, to file a civil suit against Allah for the slander and torture of his son, and Loki had even offered to act as Dan’s lawyer. Dan had accepted without hesitation, but we all already knew he was crazy.

“All rise for the honorable judge William Robertson presiding in the case of Strano versus Strano,” said the bailiff, and we rose.

The judge came in and told us, “Be seated.” What a relief.

The judge addressed the court, “First, for the sake of clarity and brevity, given the potential confusion between those before me and their incarnations who are involved in the case in different capacities, I’d like to refer to the plaintiff and the defendant by their common proper astral names.”

“John Strano,” he said, “may I call you ‘Allah?'”

‘You could just call him, “Al,”‘ I thought to myself.

“That’s fine,” said John.

“Daniel Strano, pardon, but may I call you ‘Lucifer?'”

“That’s fine,” said the angel formerly known as “Daniel.”

They had to start with this shit; let’s not forget who’s who.

Loki began his argument by demonstrating various pieces of borderline-illegal technology found in Dan’s family home that had been used to torture, coerce, and misrepresent Dan to the public. Dan’s part-time lawyer and double-time “tech-monger” had a look in his eyes at times during the presentation like he was sexually jealous of the particularly nasty devices he was parading out. Expert testimony was submitted, about the devices and about peculiar circumstances that had allowed Dan to escape death under these conditions. This aspect of the situation had become central to a public debate about physical magic on Earth, but what concerned us then was how it affected Dan’s treatment by Allah. The nuts and bolts of immortality and physical miracles were for another case. I admit I became distracted from the rather dry proceedings, imagining everyone in the court room except Dan in their underwear with clown make-up and juggling evidence or some other tom-foolery, until it was my turn to take the stand. I was sworn in.

Loki smiled disarmingly at me. “Bastet, would you please briefly describe how you know Daniel Strano?”

“Our incarnations met years ago,” I began. “His lower reached out to me again a couple of years ago, on the astral, and, given our shared political interests and his need for a friend, I try to keep him what company I can. He’s respectful of my wish to keep my lower out of things like this.”

“Are you two fighting for the same cause, or is he your cause?”

“A little bit of both,” I said. “I’m sure everyone in the room is aware of legislation we’ve helped forward and the investigations I’ve participated in on his behalf.”

“Please tell us, briefly, what you observed about Daniel’s living conditions in the time around when you first met,” directed Loki.

“I had the opportunity on many occasions to physically visit the house where Daniel has lived in most of the time since then, a five-bedroom home owned by John and Annie Strano. It is exactly where you might imagine Allah’s and Eris’ incarnations would live. The interior is beautiful and fastidiously kept, but relatively modest for the size of the house. Astrally, the house appears to have a similarly artful decor, of which the primary function is actually nominally for security and privacy,” I told him.

“Dan lives comfortably enough in the flesh,” I continued, “but the spirit is another story. Knowing him personally, I always held the opinion that Dan has a keenly perceptive awareness of his environment on the astral, despite the modification that has been made to his soul biology as a result of legal decisions made at around that time. It was determined, about when I first met him, that his awareness of the astral had become a problem, given his reputed behavior toward both physical and astral beings in the months before we met, and it was decided his soul would be magically and chemically altered to deaden his astral senses, supposedly to protect him and the people around him. It seemed obvious to me at the time that, despite the changes to his biology, Dan was still very much aware of us. The common opinion was that he only thought he could hear us anymore, due to illness and his gradually fading memory of prior events, but I carried on clear conversations with him that theoretically shouldn’t have been feasible—on the astral and in the flesh—given the purported deficits imposed on him.”

“What have more recent investigations you’ve participated in found?” asked Loki.

I considered my rehearsed words. “Dan’s soul was modified in part to disrupt his awareness of our plane, but not in the manner or to the extent commonly presented, as a human basically deaf to our plane and rendered a nonparticipant in it.”

“What were the effects of the soul modification?” he asked.

“As has been reported in the media on the authority of independent medical examiners,” I said, “Dan’s lower maintains evincible predominating autonomy of thought and action despite the control mechanisms surgically installed in his soul. It’s likely that other people who’ve received these treatments are in a similar position, is part of a recently suggested clinical opinion, except that two factors are important to Daniel’s situation: for one thing, he values demonstrating his agency to the public over the appearance of sanity, and for another, his family has attempted to systemically project the appearance that he’s half puppet and half terrorist with astral and physical illusions hidden in his environment, especially the family home, and on his astral person itself. Fixtures in the house have been used to project what amounts to a false hologram of Daniel’s behavior on the astral, while he’s gone about his business, trapped in plain physical view at times, trying to stave off the effects of his soul surgeries and to signal vainly to us that he was even aware of the disconnect between a world projected by Allah and Eris and his limited awareness of what was really happening in our world.”

Loki said, “I would like to remind Your Honor of the examples and expert analyses submitted of the various technologies that were found in Daniel’s home and on his person.”

“Frightening,” said the judge, “that so little of it was even your design.”

Loki nodded. “You flatter me, Your Honor.”

“Bastet,” Loki continued, “as you know him, was Daniel even aware of the terroristic rhetoric forwarded by his presumed astral identity for the past nine years?”

“…Probably about a fifth or a tenth of it, I’d guess,” I said, “while the rest of it is completely at odds with what I know about him personally.”

“Is that Dan’s soul, right there?” Loki asked pointing back at the plaintiff’s table.

Lucifer waved excitedly and twirled the edge of his moustache.

“Yes,” I confirmed, “but Daniel would probably rather say that he and that guy share a quantum Turing machine, whether virtual or hard.”

“Is that Daniel’s soul?” asked Loki, pointing to a holographic photograph on the evidence table of Jesus consuming dissociatives amid the strewn components of an improvised explosive device.

“While there is the tiniest superficial similarity between the two, that man is an imposter,” I testified.

Loki smiled and touched his fingertips in front of his face. “One more thing, Bastet,” he said. “Allah has made the claim that Lucifer has stolen critical technologies to make Daniel a walking physical anomaly of sorts, and to enable a rather powerful form of physical magic that reflexively reacts to protect his mortality and produces limited ‘miracles’ as a result when he is threatened. As an accredited academic, what is your opinion on the idea, originally forwarded by Daniel himself, that the apparent miracles we seem to cause by manipulating his body’s mortality are actually due to a quantum anthropic principle on his part and luck on our part, as we kill him in worlds without miracles we desire to happen?”

I cleared my throat. “I think the important thing to remember, about this claim, is that no independent investigation has found anything intrinsically special about Daniel’s body or soul that could be responsible for such effects and his apparent immortality. Holding quantum ‘many-worlds’ interpretation true, it’s reasonable that at least a set of such extremely unlikely worlds should exist, without recourse to ad hoc explanations for his apparent immortality of flesh. In this regard, Daniel’s explanation is one of the only relatively plausible ideas to be put forth that does not rely on undetectable reasons for his existential condition.”

“Thank you, Bastet,” said Loki with an assured smile. “I have no further questions for you.”

Loki walked back unhurriedly to his table with hands clasped behind his back. Allah’s attorney (a Mr. Barlowe, I think his name was,) put away a document he’d been looking at and approached the stand. I wasn’t sure what happened now.

“Bastet,” began Barlowe, “is it true that your incarnation and Lucifer’s dated at one point?”

Of course he’d target this. “It is,” I said.

“How old were you when you started dating?” he asked.

“I was sixteen,” I said.

“How old was he?” he asked.

The “king” was already in check. “I think twenty one.”

The obligatory ignorant murmurs circulated the gallery like an infectious disease.

Mr. Barlowe asked, “How did you meet him?”

“…Through work,” I told him.

He asked, “Was he your supervisor?”

“No,” I responded. “We were both cashiers, until he left the job after a couple of months.”

“Did you consider him a teacher in any regard?” he asked.

“Absolutely not,” I assured him.

“How long did you two date for?” he pressed.

“About nine months,” I said.

He asked, “Did you have sex with him?”

“Objection, Your Honor!” Loki shouted. “Relevance?”

Barlowe turned to address the judge. “I’m trying to determine the objective reliability of Bastet’s testimony and get an account of Lucifer’s behavior as concerns his mental health from someone who knows him, Your Honor.”

Loki looked disgusted. “But the particular question bears no relevance to either matter!”

I considered the implications and panicked. “Wait! No, we never had sex!” I interjected.

All three of the judge, Loki, and Barlowe gaped at me.

Barlowe removed his glasses to clean them. “Are you aware of what the age of consent is in New Jersey, Bastet?”

“No,” I said defensively.

“For your reference, it’s sixteen,” he said. He replaced the set on his nose.

“Did he ever do or say anything that made you feel threatened?” he asked.

“No,” I said.

He looked me in the eye. “Even in the slightest?”

“He was actually one of the least pressuring or aggressive boyfriends I’ve ever had,” I clarified.

“Was he ever erratic or grandiose?” asked Barlowe.

“Honestly, yes,” I admitted, “but he was extremely gentle with me.”

Barlowe kept his eyes locked to mine. “Did he ever encourage you to hurt yourself or anyone else?”

“No!” I replied.

He reminded me, “Bastet, you are under oath.”

“He jokingly told me to ‘kill’ my parents, in the obvious sense of teenage rebellion against their institutions, but we all know the man won’t even raise a fist to protect himself, and his jokes are inappropriate,” I said.

“Would you consider that an inappropriate joke?” asked Barlowe.

I said, “I’ll kill them right now.”

“Council member Bastet…” admonished the judge over some half-stifled laughter from the gallery. “Just answer his question.”

I looked Barlowe in the eye. “No,” I answered.

“Did you ever encourage him to hurt anyone?” asked Barlowe.

“Objection, Your Honor!” shouted Loki. “He’s attempting to compel the witness to testify against herself on a potentially criminal matter.”

“Sustained,” said the judge. “Mr. Barlowe, now that I’ve let you establish a context, I’m waiting for you to make your case.”

“We still haven’t gotten to Lucifer’s hospitalizations, Your Honor,” he responded.

Robertson looked nonplussed. “Well, proceed, but directly,” he said.

Barlowe nodded at the judge and straightened his glasses for a moment before continuing.

“Bastet, was Lucifer hospitalized while you were dating?” he asked.

“Yes,” I had to answer.

He asked, “How many times?”

“Twice,” I specified.

He asked, “Did you visit him?”

“Of course,” I stated.

“Did you bring him any care packages, or reading material, or the like?” he asked.

“I brought him a Teddy bear and graphic novels,” I said.

“What were the titles of the books you brought him?” he asked.

I suddenly wanted to slap my sixteen-year-old-self. “Oi… Johnny the Homicidal Maniac.”

Barlowe looked over his rims. “Excuse me?”

“The name of the graphic novel series I brought him was Johnny the Homicidal Maniac!” I said over some confused muttering from the gallery.

Loki rolled his eyes.

“I see,” continued Barlowe. “Do you feel Lucifer needed to be hospitalized?”

“I don’t know,” I said honestly. “I doubt he was a danger to himself or anyone else.”

Barlowe’s face suddenly turned lurid. “Would you feel threatened if he accused you of hurting him in ways that you had no idea about and made no sense, and if he attempted to use painful military grade restraint magic against you as he did his family?”

I thought for a moment. “How could he be held accountable for using magic against people who swore that there is no such thing and who forced him into a hospital to convince him of that by coercing him to take antipsychotics, particularly when these were to render him incapable of that kind of action?”

The judge shifted to face me squarely. “Council member Bastet, you don’t get to ask him that,” he said. “Just answer the question.”

“I suppose I would be scared,” I said, “but he never did and never will use anything like that against anyone but his parents.”

Barlowe took two measured strides in front of the witness stand and stopped. “Just one more matter, Bastet,” he said. “Is it true that you played a significant role in the research that informs the dissenting opinion on a scientific explanation for the apparent immortality of Lucifer’s flesh?”

“I played a small role in it,” I had to say. “My lower was not involved and is unaware of the work, to be specific.”

Barlowe looked me straight in the eye, again. “Do you have any significant doubts in the hypothesis that the only reason Lucifer’s lower is alive today is because of the virtually infinitesimal chance of his survival in at least one possible quantum world, that we happen to be lucky enough to be experiencing with him?”

I’m sure my face betrayed what I wished I could say. I said, “Under oath… Honestly, yes—it relies on an extremely small chance of us seeing him alive, right now—but it is the only reasonably scientific explanation that has been advanced so far, I believe.”

Barlowe faced the judge. “No further questions, Your Honor,” he said, and turned back to his table.

“Council member Bastet, you may return to your seat,” said judge Robertson.

I left the stand feeling violated and disgusted. Arguments and testimony carried on blithely in a rhythm that seemed totally oblivious to the people really affected.

Dan’s lower was brought up via camera at one point, from his cloister in his backyard. Loki asked him if he knew what was going on, and he said, “You’re debating my case in a court that has no authority over me.” The defense attempted to cross-examine when Loki finished with him, and he answered a couple of questions only to end up finally giving them the bird. The judge made a joke about how he had always wished that he had found himself in a position to do something like that, and the court laughed nervously, and things went on like Dan’s statement wasn’t basically true. It was almost easy to forget that the defendant had attempted to end the world less than a year ago and the plaintiff’s zany antics might somehow have been partly responsible for stopping it.

Sooner or perhaps later, by my pensive and distracted internal clock, we took a recess and expected the judge to return with his ruling.

When we returned, he said, “I think, whichever side one favors in this case, most would agree that major questions are left to be answered pertaining to both the soundness of mind and peculiar existential condition of the plaintiff. However, I’m sorry to say that evidence of the malfeasance alleged in the treatment and representation of the plaintiff by the defendant is clear. On the large majority of the evidence presented pertaining to the slander and psychological mistreatment of the plaintiff, and considering the effective loss of earnings and lasting damage to his mind and character, I must find in favor of the plaintiff—”

The clamor and cheers that went up from the gallery at those words was deafening. The god-king of all conservative politicians had one ruling finally not go his way, lost to one of the wickedest men in the world, even if the road to possible criminal conviction would be interminable.

The judge finished making his closing remarks. Daniel and Loki stood up and turned to exit the courtroom with a spring in their step.

I caught Lucifer with a hug and whispered to him, “Do you have to die before ‘God’ forgives you for this?”




How I Nearly Fucked Satan
Sep 27 2016

Look, he’s going to try to force my hand. He’s already putting words in my mouth, when there’s nothing to say. That would make so much more sense.

I don’t understand you, Dan, and I don’t care to, anymore. You can immortalize me all you want.

“Because it’s just not the way of the world?” you’d ask.

Because I don’t want to, Dan.

“I respect your answer, but I still love you,” you’d say.

“Why?” I wouldn’t ask.

I think I know the reason why, though, I don’t care what your answer is. You love an idealization of me, Dan—literally a psychotic one.

“I know it’s unheard of,” you might say, “to carry on so long after dead and buried, in knowledge of the reality, aware of the mores, but there is a reason your memory speaks to me, whether or not.”

Then find someone else.

“That makes even less sense,” said Dan.

Than what?

“Than talking with Bastet,” he says.

You don’t want to find someone new?

“I’ve found a dozen ‘someones new.’ I still love you,” he says.

“Why, Dan?” I wouldn’t ask.

“You’re the best one of all of them,” I wouldn’t even believe.

Do you hear me, Dan? You can’t. You made the whole fucking thing up, with a lilting tone in your voice, and I didn’t even hear it.

“Look, I don’t get it, either,” he said, “and I know it looks like a Molotov cocktail thrown at your house, but what am I supposed to do?”

Make the rational decision and give it up, Dan. It’s hard to believe that’s even sincere. It’s because you believe I’m literally an Ancient Egyptian cat god, which is cute, but it’s an instability I don’t need in my life.

“Wanna pretend?” I could imagine you saying.

No, I don’t, Dan.

“Neither do I,” you’d say.

Done with the head games, Dan. I don’t know what you want me to say, either. You’re Jesus, Dan.

“Obviously not.”

You don’t get to say that! I don’t understand it, and you don’t get to put words in my mouth!

“Can’t claim innocence.”

You certainly cannot.

“Then let’s drop it.”

Fine, yes, let’s. (I’d think, “Fuck you,” but he’d hear it.)

And that would be that. That’s the end of the conversation. Twenty years later, he’s built a statue of me the size of the Colossus of Rhodes, with cat ears. He’s written exactly 333 Shakespearean sonnets about me. Wow, man, it’s really a wonder you can’t get laid. It’s really a wonder.

“You owe me nothing,” I swear the asshole would say.

And I’d let him have that. And he’d save the world for me.

He’d try to save the world for me, because his illness latched onto me. He’d say I indirectly or directly saved him, or both, multiple times—why? Don’t say that to someone!

We met in a garden supply. He worked there, and I came in for an application, and I swear to you I was not the least bit attracted when I kissed him.

“She was this petite goth girl with long black hair—”

What color are my eyes?

“Brown?”

You have to guess?

“It was less important.”

Than what?

“Than whatever this conversation is, right here,” he said.

Oh, yeah, fucking award winning conversation in five minutes between marathon make-out sessions. Have you heard of this thing called a “date,” Dan?

“Well, by now I have,” is all he could say, “and I’m sorry.”

Dan, let me point something out: this was ten years ago. I could have a partner and a family by now.

“Tell that to Bastet,” says the nut.

Is that it? She’s not real.

“Then, I’m up shit’s creek,” I can’t understand how he’d come to the point of saying, but he has to.

Tell me I’m your soulmate, Dan.

“That crap doesn’t work.”

Tell me I’m your goddamned soulmate Dan, if that’s what you believe.

“I just said that crap doesn’t work.”

And in spite of yourself, you’re laughing. What about your brand of crap?

“Works half the time,” you’d say, “roughly.”

Oh, okay. So go away.

“You go away.”

Because she won’t?

“Ask her,” I don’t want to hear you saying anymore.

This conversation goes nowhere good, or right, or even sane.

“I have trouble imagining you falling in madly and deeply with me, honestly, at this point,” you say.

Then you understand, Dan. Say, “But what if she’s real?” Dan.

“But what if she’s real?”

My friend, at least a part of me wishes I could say she was. She is not, Dan.

He’ll say, “I’m not gonna argue with you.”

No, Dan, we are not having this conversation right now.

“This is getting creepy.”

By the gaslight of the moon, Susanna.

“I’m willing to treat it as a fantasy,” would at least be true.

You’ll make someone else very happy that way.

“This is what I live with on a daily basis, except I don’t want her to go away,” he says.

I ask, “How far would you take it, Dan?”

You don’t want to know. It’s not the way you think.

“Then, how is it?” I wanna know.

“She is someone unlike any other person I know,” you say, “or don’t know.”

She fills your inkwell, Dan? She’s a convenient unattainable? You’re a nut!

“She’s worth it!” Dan says.

“You can’t even know that,” I say in a parallel dimension.

“Something tells me you two aren’t actually so different, in ‘reality.'”

By the time I started the job at the garden center, he was already coming apart at the seams. We flirted a bit, my first fucking day on the job, and I think I was over at your house that week, wasn’t I?

“We went for a walk,” he’d say.

It was a walk to remember, Dan. Coming back to your house, you grabbed my hand—

“I asked if it was alright,” you’d point out.

You asked if it was alright to do so, as you grabbed my hand, and I said, “Yes.” We made out on the couch in his basement for the next nine months, and then I dumped him.

“You’re skipping all the good parts,” you’d say.

What good parts? The dates you never took me on? The sex we never had? Pray tell, Dan, what were these supposed “good parts”?

“You gave me an anatomically correct sculpture of a human heart in a black coffin shaped box.”

You didn’t even appreciate it.

“I still have it,” you’d say without irony intended.

That’s even worse, Dan. You probably still have every little knick-knack I brought you.

“Half of them, up in the attic or back tucked away,” you could probably say honestly.

You’re obsessed. You wanna act nonchalant, but this isn’t normal.

“We’d both say, ‘Fuck normal,’ Katie,” I can’t hear you say anymore. “I got you a plush Cthulhu doll for Valentine’s Day.”

I threw it out, Dan.

“I didn’t throw out the Teddy Bear you made me, with the eyes stitched over and a third eye open on its forehead.”

You’re creepier than that bear.

“Nearly as creepy,” you’d think. “I named him ‘Tachyon.'”

Because you had these bizarre ideas about quantum physics! You practically ran around shouting at people that they were “quantum computers!”

“And then I got a degree in physics,” of course. “I was going to research topological quantum computation for my doctorate, but my advisor was a total asshole.”

So you became a crystal healer, instead.

And you’d say, “That reminds me of the mix CDs we swapped, for some reason.”

I hope you at least lost those.

“I did, but they’ve had a lasting impact on my tastes,” I could imagine you saying, or something.

Go take some Dexedrine, Daniel.

“I got that joke literally six years later.”

I don’t care if you ever ‘got it.’

“She brought me a rabbit, to keep me company—”

No one is ever going to get that joke but you.

“I’m sure you found at least another person or two who would,” you’d say anyway.

But that’s why your love for me is eternal, right? Dan, I remember you as this virtual Looney Toon with an ax to grind against the world and against God, who was really rather laughable in retrospect!

“At least it’s not the only dimension of my personality, anymore,” he says.

But I never said it ever was. Give me a little more vicarious credit, by proxy, Dan, since I picked a winner like you.

“Isn’t it truly to your personal credit that you supported someone incapable of helping himself, at the time, largely for the sake of your own moral compass, without expectation of reward?” you actually asked me.

“That’s a double-edged sword Dan!” I yelled at him. “That’s another golden apple I don’t want to eat!”

I know what you’re saying, but it’s true.

“So, corner me, and have your way with my imagined point of view!” I wanna scream in his face.

“I’ve thought about this conversation a thousand times,” he said, “and I understand why you’d rather not have it.”

Then we’re not having it.

“Best conversation I never had in ten years,” you bastard.

He never even took me on a single date. You never wrote me that poem, Dan, until I was long gone.

“You’re right,” he’d admit.

Well, it wasn’t so special. It wasn’t real, Dan. It was a gesture made at me, for you, like everything else.

“That last part isn’t true,” you might have half a right to say.

Dan, regardless, it was completely unrealistic.

“Katie, your ‘idealization,’ who is my closest friend, is just as sick as I am with the false ‘realism’ that underscores our alienation and every nuclear bomb,” I could maybe imagine you saying.

It’s not that big, Dan. It’s not the extinction of humanity, and it’s not the meaning of life—and I’m not her.

“… Are you sure?”

Eighty percent, Dan.

“Don’t let me put words in your mouth!” he says, right.

Take a guess whether I feel the same way sometimes, Dan.

“That’s why, Katie. You don’t know how hard that actually is to find.”

It’s not hard at all, Dan. I’ve met plenty of people who do more about it than you, or me.

“It’d be in poor taste if I gave you a list of the concrete actions I’ve taken toward that end,” you’d have the balls to say.

That’s already in poor taste, though.

“I started to realize that the posturing and ideals weren’t enough, at some point, I’m sure you could understand, but that’s just growing up. The Peace Corps wouldn’t take me, Katie, for an obvious reason. I’m also not the most social and disarming personality, by nature, but there are other avenues besides personally ladling soup.”

Because you’re full of yourself? So you throw money at it, you’re saying?

“I’ll never stop, however it’s perceived,” you say anyway.

Dan, that’s far too easy, but I admit that it might actually be slightly more to your credit than I gave you, but it might not even be. I guess I didn’t think about it, because why would I?

“You basically convinced me to go vegetarian, delayed. My primary reason is energy efficiency and emissions. I’m vegan, at this point,” I’m sure you’d wanna tell me. Let me make a mark on the scorecard, Jesus.

That’s nice, and I actually appreciate it, in a certain way, but it doesn’t matter, Dan.

“That’s not why I’m doing it,” I’m sure. Oh, of course, not Dan.

“Look, neither one of us wants it to be a dick measuring contest.”

You’re damn right, buddy. It also has nothing to do with why I’m not gonna talk with you.

“The less important part is whether you ever talk with me,” I don’t completely believe or understand.

Then what’s the important part, Dan? A book of sonnets for me that I’ll never read?

“You’re getting warm.”

A book of sonnets that my idealization will like?

“Um… Yeah, probably,” half blew my mind.

Then take it up with her!

“Do any of these characterizations not fit?”

Yet, you’re not sure what color my eyes are.

“Must be ‘true love,’ with ponies and rainbow sprinkles,” I could picture you saying.

Well, it’s not reciprocated.

“That’s your decision, and it’s okay, but it has no bearing on the way I feel about you.”

You’re literally the craziest person on the planet. I finally see. You’re completely batshit.

“We’d ‘win’ the Prisoners’ Dilemma,” might sound like yet another non sequitor, but you’d go ahead and “mansplain” it anyway, and I’d probably at least accept that’s actually a pretty high compliment, coming from you.

When I broke up with him, as a teenager, it might have been one of the hardest things I ever had to do up to that point. To his very limited credit, he tried his best to make it no harder for me than it had to be.

“You had a bright future, and my life was a shambles. It wouldn’t have been fair to you.”

It’s moot, Dan. We never even had sex. I couldn’t pick his penis out a lineup if a rape charge depended on it.

“That first part, I still don’t think it’s as important as people make it out to be, in the particular way most people think about it.”

It’s not a small part, Dan.

“You’d probably at least remember that much.”

Fuck you, Satan!

“I wasn’t ready,” you might actually say.

I don’t know what to think about that, Dan, but it’s never gonna fucking matter, anymore.




A Perfect Day in Hell
Oct 01 2016

“What happens on the Astral stays on the Astral,” I like to tell myself sometimes, but I know it isn’t true. Back on planet Earth, only one of us in love with the other, but I give him a certain provisional credit for understanding and respecting that. It doesn’t put his “meat” off of romancing the abstract idea of me. The common knowledge and platitudes break down, though, when you’ve reached the point in your “spiritual evolution” where the ideal is nearly as concrete as the reality.

His love has the heft of an epic and the vulgarity of a limerick. He makes me feel “real” in a way that I admit no one else might.

Let me offer, I don’t think it really matters if I’m her or if I’m the one he loves. It doesn’t matter if he’s Satan incarnate. It doesn’t matter if God exists, and it doesn’t matter if miracles happen, to him.

He was sitting on a park bench overlooking the old town under the natural fall regalia, where he told me to meet him. His “meat,” his “lower,” was probably off somewhere writing sonnets. He was dressed and groomed tidily, but he’d chosen to project his Chuck Taylor high tops and a hooded sweatshirt, which was half a relief given my “Chucks” and “hoodie.” We were both already impressed enough. I think either of us could have shown up in a potato sack, and it wouldn’t have ultimately been so important to the other. It might have even made me smile.

He looked me down to my sneakers and said, “This is the perfect weather.”

“Okay, so, ‘no,'” I said.

He smiled. “It’s kinda chilly in Hell, today.”

I hopped down on the bench next to him.

“I got stuck in bumper-to-bumper traffic on the way here,” I said.

“Hm,” he said, “my first time in it was like trying to pack eight college students in a four-seater.”

“You ever sit on a transmission shifter?” I asked him.

“I prefer the gas hatch,” he said.

“Do you know where Smart cars from?” I asked.

He said, “A horse is at least human, for ‘chrissake.'”

“You should try riding a few more,” I said.

“There’ve been a few, but it’s easier to write sonnets about one in particular, for a reason I don’t completely understand, either,” he said.

We looked each other in the face. “You should try harder,” I said.

He looked out over the gables and steeples and said, “I’m in love with sonnets.”

I might have blushed. “That’s your problem!” I told him.

He stood up and stretched, and he said, “Come on, it’s gonna get dark.”

We started walking the path down the hillside.

A ways down, he said, “There’s an old graveyard on the way.”

(Our world is not without death. Any lifespan comes to an end. Everything dies but his pointless, irrational affection.)

“I’m supposed to walk alone in a graveyard with you at dusk?” I prodded him.

He looked at me sidelong and said, “I’ll bet you’ve had worse dates.”

“See, that’s weird, because I’m almost positive I must have had worse dates with you, but I can’t seem to think of any,” I said with a smile.

“I bought my dates over the counter, then,” he said, “but it’s a mistake I’ve accepted.”

“I wouldn’t settle for less, anymore,” I said, and we walked in silence for a bit.

We reached the cemetery gate and entered. The moss covered monuments towered over us, as if petrified trees rendered static and eternal in death.

“They’re bigger than I realized,” he said.

“Get a ruler,” I told him.

He looked down his nose at me. “Just sit on a few and tell me which one’s biggest,” he said, “I’ll take your word for it.”

“That’s sexy, ‘tee-hee,'” I said.

I noticed, “Some of them are decorated. It might be for All Hallows’.”

“Little early…” he said looking around at the garlands and flowers.

“I’ll bet the town takes it pretty seriously,” I said. “How do you think they all died?”

His eyes traced up one of the higher obelisks. “Around here,” he said, “there’s a good chance a few were casualties in a war against ‘God.'”

“What do you think comes after the afterlife?” I wondered.

“… The quantum after-afterlife, obviously,” he said.

“I kinda like that,” I told him. “Why should the meat puppets have all the fun?”

“It’s true,” he said. “It implies enough physical life exists to simulate the virtual world, though.”

“You went from fantasy love story to cyberpunk dystopia,” I pointed out.

“The anime fans won’t think it’s weird,” he said.

“It’s an anime I’d like to see,” I told him honestly. “Is this the fan-service episode?”

“Did you bring a bathing suit?” he asked.

“Maybe we aren’t exactly that kind of anime,” I reconsidered.

“Oh, we’re definitely that kind of anime,” he said, “but I think we’ve already passed the mid-season recap, anyway.”

“… Cat girls,” was all I said.

“… And a comic relief character with a raging Jesus complex,” he added.

“That’s not quite as universal,” I considered for him, “but I think I might have seen that one.”

I said, “Hey, look at that one.” I pointed to a big monument that was off by itself. The sculpture on it gave the impression of angel skeletons, life-size, with wings like great praying hands. They might not have been entirely sculpture, I thought the more I looked at them.

We read some of the inscription around the structure.

“I was right,” he said. “It’s Crusades era. Hell didn’t have an easy time of it.”

He scratched his head. “I still don’t know how anyone thought Jesus would think that was a good idea.”

“That obviously wasn’t the real reason,” I said.

“Of course, and it never is,” he added.

We kinda just stood in silence for a minute, gaping at yet another monument to honor the victims of man’s mistakes. He had this look on his face like he wanted to do something drastic and hasty about it, but none of us can rewrite history, at this point.

“It’s getting dark,” I observed.

“There’s a bookstore I wanna visit in town,” he said. “It’s got a wide selection. They’ve got some rarities, I hear. They have a beacon, too, and we could just phase over there, now.”

“I wanna walk,” I said.

“He misses talking with her,” he said.

“He never gave her back her books,” I reminded him.

“I’ll make it up to you now,” he offered, as we turned back toward the gate.

“That’s not the point, ‘Lucifer,'” I thought as we started to walk, but I didn’t say it to him.

Down the way, he asked me, “What are you dressing as for Halloween, this year?”

I said, “I dunno, how would Satan’s imaginary pseudo girlfriend dress?”

“Any way she wants,” he said with a laugh.

“Right, well, that’s at least true, I guess,” was all the wit I had to respond with, for a moment. “Who would Satan dress as?”

“Jesus,” he said.

“What if he was trying?” I pressed him.

“Zombie Jesus,” he said.

“I think Judas would be more appropriate, zombie or otherwise,” I suggested.

“Hm, I’ll seriously consider it,” he said.

“See, you could go Divine Comedy with it, but I’m having trouble imagining how you make it obvious enough,” I said on second thought. “Go as a modern Dracula, with a red suit and a gun”

“We’d get it, but that might be even more subtle, to most people,” he said.

“It’d be sexier than George W. Bush, at least,” I assured him.

A little demon came screeching past us on the street, giddily. The lights in the windows of the houses and shops looked like jack-o’-laterns, as we set foot on the cobblestones that paved the roads in town.

“The bookstore is right over this way,” he said, pointing.

“Do they serve alcohol?” I asked.

“Yes,” he said.

“I love Hell,” I had to say.

“… Especially this time of year,” he said, sweeping his hands over the ghoulish decorations and costumes.

“Some of them aren’t even costumes,” I said with a laugh.

“Not a sexy construction worker in sight, either,” he added.

We did, in fact, hit the drinks counter in the bookshop first, for mulled cider. I wasn’t sure exactly what kind of apples they used, but it had a pleasant nose.

“We’re missing a pumpkin spice joke, to ruin the literary shelf-life,” he pointed out.

“They were actually selling bacon chai,” I reminded him.

“I wonder if they’ll remember that in a thousand years,” he said, and then he took a first relaxed sip.

“I will,” I knew.

We got on a tangent about the particular marketing campaigns that were responsible for that, but it wasn’t really important.

It might not sound romantic, but we went our separate ways for books. Our respective rarities were in more or less distant sections, some of them, but we agreed to meet by the manga.

What do I think about what we’re doing, here? It’s a complicated situation to explain to an uninvolved party. Despite the occasional perfect day in Hell, he desperately needed a particular kind of friendship that was just hard to come by in his world, regardless of why that was. It made me sad, but I think we both understood the situation. Maybe, I could be happy to be there for him in that specific necessary capacity that I couldn’t quite cleanly delineate. He had enough insight, at least. It made sense that he had a broader perspective on the situation than most people would, when I thought about it.

Dan, you make my heart hurt. You think it’s worth it, at least, but I’m not sure if God likes you, man. More importantly, you’re not gonna stop imagining me as an intelligent person who cares deeply about you, for a reason that I have to admit makes perfect sense.

The cider’s going to my head, Dan. You barely even take it personally, somehow. Perhaps you should, man.

We met by the comics, with smiles and arms full of books. He offered to buy a manga for me, and then we paid for our words. I either wished him an early “goodnight” or fucked his brains out. He might recall something different.




The Most Likely of All Possible Worlds
Sep 29 2016

Ilya wants her cancer cured. Min wants his mother’s cancer cured. Bo wants a functioning lung. Leon wants his son’s heart to last just long enough to make it to the transplant. Ronald Drumpf wants a bigger penis.

“I knew it was gonna end this way,” I think every day, now. See, the thing is, it turns out that even the “gods” aren’t truly capable of miracles. We can’t rewrite the physics “rule book,” believe it or not.

We’ve been on this planet for a very long time. We’ve seen things it isn’t even possible for you mortals to see. However, the debate over religion is almost identically the same one you already know as humans. Some of us try really hard, to answer your prayers, but please believe me that you can often accomplish more by picking up a soup ladle or donating to a highly reputed charity. There is relatively little in my purview, as the “god” Bastet, that is not available to any one of you, to affect real change on this beautiful, delicate little planet we all call home. In reality, I am an elected politician to you, and that is basically all. Please, remember the pharaoh. Remember the Japanese emporer. Remember the divine right of kings, and remember our shared history.

I cannot put it more plainly. We exist; we are all but human. The apparent confusion around this fact is virtually the same as your debate between the scientific fact of evolution and the baseless claims of a fascist “God” tantamount to the propaganda of North Korea. I can no longer euphemize this. It might be time I left politics.

I’m done with it, in fact. Timothy wants to be able to walk, and an essentially failed businessman riding on his television notoriety and his inheritance from his father is paying millions under the table for penis enlargement magic. “Because it’s natural,” I kid you not.

Mind you, he doesn’t need a bigger penis. Of course, this is very probably true, and I might have to feel a little bad for him, and find a respect for his personal request, if his penis is in fact clinically “micro,” though the issue here isn’t when it’s right to feel bad about its size, you see. He’s very quick to point out, though, that his penis is already huge. He’s quick to remind us, on national television, he just wants to be really freakishly big. He claims he considered asking for “naturally” larger breasts for his wife, or even his daughter—his words—but his wife really just can’t get enough of the “peen,” I’m sure. She likes ’em big as loaves of bread, Ronald tells us, because he wasn’t able to circumvent the provision that requests for “physical magic” are to be a matter of public record, since that “breakthrough” hit the scene.

Everybody gets one, basically, subject to the condition that it isn’t “too” obvious, usually, or illegal. Madison wants her cat to live another year. Jeremy donated his to a group that will use it to further peace in the Middle East. Ronald wants testicles the size of avocados.

So, maybe I should explain how “physical magic” works: it doesn’t. In most worlds, I should not have to qualify that statement. We’ve recently made a very important discovery, though: it can appear to work in a way that is not a stage illusion to the eye, or the telescope, or the microscope, or the stethoscope, until you understand the somewhat subtle physical reason why things happen that way, and then to carry on believing it is a political magic trick. If you’re willing to literally die if you don’t win this election, you can live almost only to see yourself win it, truly enough.

My friend, how “physical magic” works, or rather doesn’t, is as simple as this paradox, which rather isn’t: you are guaranteed a physically possible result will happen, regardless of how likely it is to happen. The likelihood to see it is physically predictable, yet all likely and unlikely physically possible scenarios occur. It happens all ways, and we see it happen any of them, with a guarantee that all are seen by different versions of us. Understanding the social implications of this is critically important to my world—our world—but it doesn’t become a concern in an obvious way until you win the lottery a few hundred times in a row. That “evidence” can be read many ways. Superstition and religion are still the tools of the miracle workers and policy makers.

We once did not utter the holiest four letter name of “God” for this reason—he has oppressed us for thousands of years! Yet, to speak could unmake our being. A tyrant, a mad man, yoked all our world under his delusion of grandeur, and counted the age of the universe from the moment of his birth. Allah, Adonai, Father of Christ, believe me, yours is not the only name!

How many of them did you steal, Elohim? How many of us did you slay to send a proxy in their place, to take their name? How many did you devour, you fat, gassy, beast? Now, here we are. When the world showed you some greater measure of tolerance, you took advantage of us, and taught your followers to believe in only you, against any evidence. This is not our way, or the way of the universe, Yahweh. Rome conquered you as a nation, but had no problem with you as a god. Then, you pretended to bring an honest man back from the dead, and you swore his followers to no oath but yours. Maybe that was for some good discerned, Qanna, but the dead do not control their memory. Ultimately, no one of us does. I don’t suppose you’ve met the Jains, or any of us, El Shaddai. It is not even in the true hearts of so many of your followers, but your jealous organ!

Say it, human! Say that your God is perfect, and infinite in all capacities, and that you believe him before all the scientific evidence that could be and your own eyes and ears! This is the self-unaware refrain of fascism! This is a poison whose antidote is the study of history!

So, when Ronald Peckerwood wanted surgery-free “natural male enhancement,” God knows He’d take the money, like Kim Jong Il would. Shiva wouldn’t. Neither would I. Maybe “God” just “happened” into the absolute power to corrupt, though, and I give myself too much credit. I think I know garbage men who’d have more integrity.

“See, those assholes can absolutely waste their physical magic on trying to do good for other people who didn’t work for it, and walk away with nothing to show for it,” Ronald bombasted through the television. “They’re idiots. No one’s gonna do that for them. Let ’em waste it on any refugee or illegal immigrant who’s just gonna turn around and pay the favor back with a suicide bomb. Idiots, all of them. You won’t see me wasting my opportunities.”

Right, Ronald. You’re such a cunning businessman, with a gigantic penis, by the way. Your net “success” starting from the capital of your inheritance hasn’t even beat the average market return! You’ve literally wasted more money than you’ve ever made! I’m not even talking about your garish lifestyle, your gold-plated toilet, but rather just the opportunity cost not to put the money in a damned index fund! You could have had a virtual guarantee of better return sitting on your ass rather than creating shell corporations to bankrupt, to dodge debt and taxes!

“Stop screaming at the broadcast,” Maat said to me.

“Was I screaming?” I had to ask.

“I can hear what you’re thinking,” she said.

“He’s literally ready to end the world over this!” I yelled at her.

“They all are, Bast,” she said.

“What do you think about that?” I asked her.

“Personally, or as historical judge of fate in the afterlife?” she asked.

“The second one, first,” I said.

“It’s genuinely a matter of ignorance, for most people,” she said. “You can see how the best scientific explanation for ‘physical magic’ is not an easy one to understand well enough to accept.”

“… And in the other capacity?” I was curious.

“The planet is easily lead by willfully ignorant people and hypocrites, and I’m sick of this shit,” she said.

“How do we stop it?” I asked.

“… The End?” she clarified. “I don’t have a better suggestion than what we’re already doing. We shouldn’t take it personally. If we take it personally, and we say something people already don’t wanna hear in a way they definitely don’t want to hear it, everyone has far too many other avenues for immediate gratification today to listen to what we’re saying for another three seconds.”

“We’re competing with thousands of flavors of donkey porn on every person’s handheld device,” I said, slumping.

“It’s worse than that,” she said. “The distractions are researched at great expense to be carefully orchestrated, though phone porn might suffice.”

Maat smiled. “What do you think about the Guinea pig’s role in this?” she asked me.

“Yeah, what the hell am I supposed to think?” I wondered. “My rational mind tells me that’s really all he is, a ‘Guinea pig,’ like even he says. I honestly believe at this point that literally every one of us ends up in shoes closely resembling his in a parallel quantum world.”

I said, “He couldn’t be less political.”

“Is that good or bad?” Maat asked.

“It’s a guilty pleasure,” I admitted. “It’s fun to watch him pop, but that’s super convenient for good ol’ ‘Al’ and Eris, when the pig eats his foot.”

“It’s also extremely inconvenient, I think,” said Maat.

“All he wants is a hole in the ground and a loaf of whole wheat bread,” I said, melting into my chair. “I don’t know if he even deserves it.”

“Either way, he gets it, in one of these worlds, and I’m starting to think we all do,” said Maat.

I rubbed my third temple. “The whole fucking time, that’s what that weird subtext to the damned afterlife really was, that we thought we understood.”

“It’s obviously more complicated than that,” said Maat, “but it’s not angels flying out of Al’s butt, for sure.”

I couldn’t stop staring at Drumpf’s squinchy orange mug. “Why did we let it go on this long, Maat?” I asked half rhetorically.

“Which part?” she responded.

“… Keeping the important parts half a secret from the humans,” I said.

She laughed devilishly. “I could be a jerk and just fall back on the fact that it was the democratic will of the people, nominally.”

“Why?” I wanted to know.

“Bast, for one thing, we’re essentially parasites,” she said. “The humans might not take kindly to the fact that we basically lay eggs in their brains, or maybe rather their minds.”

“Our biologies are so intricately interwoven that that’s really not an accurate way to put it,” I said. “They wouldn’t have understood thousands of years ago, like we didn’t, but we share the capacity to look at it clinically, today.”

“… Maybe in the past fifty to one hundred years,” said Maat, “or two hundred, at most.”

“Then why not in the past fifty years, Maat?” I just wanted to hear her state the obvious.

“I could regurgitate the talking points,” she said, “about mental privacy, and respect for the ancient religious taboos, and investing too much in the humans with questionable prospects for return, but those are bullshit.”

“Then why?” I asked her again.

“… So ‘God’ doesn’t have to be accountable to them, too, when he takes money to grow Tronald Dump’s dick, obviously,” she said.

“You’re one of my best friends, Maat,” I told her.

“When does ‘Oo-la-lonald’ come up in the queue for his natural male enhancement miracle?” she asked.

“Tomorrow,” I said, “right after a fourteen year old who’s asking for her HIV to be cured.”

“That’s really the most tragic part,” said Maat.

“What?” I asked. “That it’s false hope? That the ‘Guinea pig’ is gonna see a world where she’s cured by chance, which has zero actual bearing on her prospects for a cure? ‘Oh, thank you, God!’ she’ll say, and the cameras will come in for close-ups on her and her family’s tears, and all it is in reality is the Guinea pig’s personal Hell.”

“Maybe ours, too,” said Maat.

I raised an eyebrow. “Is it?” I asked her.

“… Not the HIV patient’s,” she said.

“Is it an illusion?” I asked her.

“She’ll get her cure, but yes,” she said.

“She won’t get her cure, Maat,” I said. “That’s why this is so utterly malicious. The reality is, we’re just going to see the Guinea pig die, instead.”

Maat put her hand to her chin. “That’s so hard to parse,” she said. “By now, it’s so hard to believe.”

“Yeah, well, the lab rat has been successfully damned, by now, for cracking too many jokes at God’s expense,” I said, gathering myself to leave. “Ultimately, it’s not anyone’s fault, when it happens to all of us.”

“It was partly his own choice, Bast,” she said. “Where are you going?”

“I’m gonna get a hammer and go smash Ron’s dick with it til it doubles in size, so he doesn’t have to kill my delusional ‘ex,’ anymore,” I said in a huff.

“Bast, I’m curious!” she called after me. “What do you plan to do when it’s your turn to be the lab rat?”

“It’s an objectively physically true statement that I’m probably gonna find out in like five seconds, Maat!” I called without turning back.

I’d already arranged the meeting, but I was honestly slightly ‘skeeved’ by the idea of talking with him in private. The mansion I was told to meet him at, on the Astral, (in a rich neighborhood of Heaven, of course,) was even gaudier than the physical ones the guy attached to his favorite cocktail wiener slept in. This was hopeless, I already knew. Even if he relented, it’s not like there weren’t billions more people ready to take his spot in line. I just had to have it out with him, for me. I knew what was going to happen, in the set of worlds following the likely general scenario, and I knew what was going to happen down the road in the one he was convinced was a sure bet.

Even his “soul’s” face looked like a squinchy orange potato head doll, in person. (I swear to you he was playing with a giant corn syrup stretch doll while “discreetly” looking at porn on a monitor turned away from the door, when I walked in.)

“Miss Bast, welcome to my humble abode,” he said, as I entered.

I cringed. “Normally it’s ‘council member Bast,’ Mr. Drumpf, but I guess the formalities aren’t really important, particularly since I’m here on personal business,” I said gently.

“Oh, you’re a council member?” he asked, eyeing me in a way that even “God” usually wouldn’t get away with. “Can I ask, what are you, Bast?”

I knew what he meant. “I don’t know what you mean,” I responded.

“I mean, your ‘lower,'” he said, “is she, like, Egyptian?”

That ended the charade, buddy. “My ‘lower’ is a vegan taxidermist who works with roadkill, whose television appearances were actually watched by the singular and coveted ‘Jesus’ demographic, unlike yours.”

He was taken aback, but then he smiled. “Me-ow, Bastie baby. For a council member, you don’t have the best poker face, do you? My secretary told me you had a request for me.”

I said low, “Ronald, it might not be so much of a request as a warning about the shit show you’re about to walk into blind, but, for the Hell of it, let me ask you, first: would there be anything to convince you to cancel your request in the physical magic queue, to be served tomorrow?”

“Ohhh, say no more, Kitty,” he said, “say no more. I get it, now. You’re sick of your boy toy being pushed around, and you just can’t take it, can you? Let me tell you what—here’s what I’m gonna do for you, Bastie. First, I’m gonna unzip my pants,” he said as he reached for his zipper. “Then, you’re gonna put those pretty lips against my—”

“—Ron!” I yelled. I stabbed at him: “I’m gonna yank it down hard like a slot machine lever til your eyes spin around and come up cherries, you racist, misogynist hog.”

He zipped back up and gaped at me, and then he sat down with an angry look on his face. He knit his fingers in front of him. He said, “‘Kitty-Kat,’ I’m gonna say something I usually wouldn’t say. I’d never say it. This wasn’t exactly what I was expecting, when my secretary told me you needed a favor, and I don’t like it. I don’t like it one bit. I respect it, though, a little, I admit. I have to admit.”

I closed my eyes for a moment, and I took a deep breath. “Ron, there are two general sets of worlds we could find ourselves in by this time tomorrow. The one you’re expecting, that most of the world is expecting, contains you with your cock blown up like a party balloon. The other general set, which is probably trillions of times more likely as a whole, contains my close friend, dead, and your penis is nonplussed. For his death, we are no more likely to find ourselves in the first general scenario set, is the majority opinion in the scientific community at this point, on the topic of ‘physical magic.'”

He scowled. “That’s such an obvious lie that I could laugh at it, Bast. Look at the endless line of successes! Every day, we get miracles out of him, out of that bastard rebel. The proof is indisputable.”

“Then how does it work, Ron?” I asked him.

“He stole the technology from God!” he shouted. “He has to exist, now—it’s an ‘existential imperative,’ I think the terminology is—so if we move to kill him, that world just doesn’t exist, because it can’t!”

“What physics textbook did you read that one in, Ronald?” I prodded him.

“It’s as plain as day, Bast! Experiment is on our side, this time!” he said. “Why are you targeting me? What about the dozens of people in line between now and me?”

“‘Dumpf,'” I addressed his greatness, “the difference between you and most of them is that you’re a tiny, selfish prick.”

He laughed and smiled. “Except, pretty soon, I’ll be a colossal prick, Bastie!”

We stared at each other. My expression didn’t move a millimeter.

“I mean, I already am, that is, but bigger,” he said. “It’s relative.”

“Ron,” I said to him, “when God answers your prayers for a horse cock, it’ll just be one more reason that nobody would ever sleep with you but a gold digger.”

His face turned lurid. “You think you’re so damn witty, bitch, but that doesn’t even make any sense when you think about, when you really think about it. I mean, even a hooker—”

“‘Frumpf,'” I said, “I know some hookers, and you’re not up to their standards, but I’ll give you that you might find a handful of really desperate ones on the bottom tier.”

“You don’t know who you’re talking with!” he roared. “I’m the best businessman, the greatest—”

“Ron,” I said, “you could have taken Finance 101 at community college, put your inheritance in a mutual fund that promised average market return like your professor basically would have told you, sat on your ass wanking and eating cheese puffs for the rest of your life, and literally ended up making more money that way, I hope we both realize.”

“You’re nothing but a flat-chested, ugly bitch in the end, ‘Bast-tard,'” he fumed.

“‘Lumpf,’ put a handle on your head and sell it to Louis Vuitton,” I suggested.

“Out, bitch!” he exploded at me, as I turned to walk the long mile to his office door. “Your boyfriend is gonna suck it when it’s twice the size of his!”

“Go to Hell, ‘Fonald,'” I said without looking back.

“I own half of Hell, in fact. The taxes are outrageous, just insane—you really couldn’t afford them,” he said.

I turned to face him from the door. “That’s why they have the best infrastructure, education, and healthcare on the goddamned Astral, ‘Pumpf,'” I said, and I blew him a kiss as I exited.

“That accomplished nothing,” I thought as I strutted my way in escort out of the mansion, “but, man, did it feel great!”

The world is already over, I decided. I took a day off to count my “blessings” and to watch the endless stream of winning lotto tickets get cashed.

Ilya’s cancer was “cured.” Min’s mother was “cured.” Bo’s lung started to work, by a stroke of improbable luck. Leon’s son rolled seven after seven. I knew that, for every wish granted, a vastly more probable set of worlds kicked us in the head, completely unprepared for it. I knew we were only living in a ‘Guinea pig’s’ personal Hell, by alien luck, in nearly the tiniest possible fraction of a quantum mechanical universal wave function—just like his father had planned.

Human, how many planets have we colonized? In a universe that is over thirteen and a half billion years old, by anyone’s best estimate, with about 70 billions of trillions of stars in the part of it which we can observe, alone, of which some others almost assuredly host life by any reasonable scientific guess, why do you think that an omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent, and reputedly benevolent being has occupied ‘Himself,’ on this pale blue mote, with its Armageddon, its worship, and eternal damnation for something like putting the penis in the butt or kinda scissoring? What if the floor was wet and you kinda slipped? What if it was dark and you thought it was a pickle? You really think She gives a shit? (I could only imagine She’d at least slightly prefer ‘She,’ by the way, but maybe that’s just me.) You really think She’d punish you for that? You really think She’d put a political imperative to you and want you to push Her agenda for Her while instructing you to deny your logic and reason? You really think She’d want you to compel the rest of the world to worship Her as you do, while She straps a bomb to the chest of someone who has an infinitesimally different interpretation of Her, to come blow up you and your family?

My child! This is a sickness and a lie! This has every hallmark of living under fascist, authoritarian tyranny!

Drumpf stepped up to cash his ticket, before they even opened the gates for the ponies. Dan suffered a major heart attack and a stroke, in practically all worlds, except for a razor-thin bridge to whatever kind of life came after.

They actually cut off his penis. They actually took a machete and hacked it off.




Heaven
Sep 17 2016

Alice was one of seven children. She gave birth to four of her own. She was seven times a grandmother. Then, she was over a dozen-fold a great grandmother. The family started to notice there was something strange by the middle of the fourth generation after hers.

“Alice,” I whispered to her one Christmas as she watched children more than a century younger than her open presents she’d picked for them, “you have been given a great gift that is difficult to understand, but all that matters is that you use it with kindness.” I didn’t know if she’d heard me. The “veil” thins for you, when you’re that old, but she’d never met or even seen me. She didn’t know who I was, but maybe I’d seen a case similar to hers, before.

A very young child clumsily ripped the paper away from a box containing a dinosaur, and the child clapped her hands and shrieked in delight.

“That’s the main thing,” Alice said, watching the child, enraptured.

“That’s the main thing, Alice,” I tried to whisper back in her ear.

One by one, she watched her children die. She didn’t understand it. She begged God to stop. She asked God why she was different, but she praised and thanked Him, if it be His will.

I came to her at a funeral, one night. I tried to tell her, “Alice, God is not testing you. God does not play fast-and-loose with the hearts and minds of kind people, if She truly is God. She derives no entertainment from this, and She feels what you feel. What She feels most is the ecstasy and grief of the Mother.”

Through fierce tears, she smiled and said, “I’d like to give God a piece of my mind,” and laughed. “I think He’s asleep on the job.” Her army of a family looked on as if a holy mystery.

She said, “What the mother feels most is the joy and the pain and the absence of the child.”

She gradually took a different, reverent attitude toward religion. She took an interest in science. She was an immigrant from a poor family. Her education was limited, and she had an aversion to the complicated math, but she read books about science in plain English. She’d talk about it with the kids’ kids’ kids, when she’d cook and the army would come for Sunday dinner. Some of them wanted to study science and medicine, and they’d point to her as chief among their reasons.

Years passed, and more and more people began to notice how special she was, outside of her family. Doctors and scientists felt compelled to try to explain her. Religions pointed to an obvious explanation that, luckily, many people were only ready to take with a grain of salt, including her. She became a “meme,” whatever the Hell that meant; her youngest descendants joked that it finally clinched her true immortality. People tried to ask her, “Why?” but she knew she did’t know the reason why, much less the Reason Why.

She barely recognized the world anymore. She lived long enough to distinguish the difference in the climate on the basis of simple personal anecdotal recollection. She started to realize that it was going to be a real problem for her grand kids, somewhere shortly down the generations. She used her little bit of fame to remind the world about it. She spoke simply about how her “greatest” grandchildren wanted to fly in rocket ships. Money came in incidental to her singular circumstances, and she donated much of it to feed people she considered her neighbors and children, and to help clean energy alternatives. By her hundredth birthday, which was a distant memory in itself, she had already resolved never to miss another election.

Who knows what impact she really had? People started to take the existential threats to “her children” generally seriously, though. She was a well behaved grandmother, but she told off a senator at a public speaking engagement she was invited to, once. “I’m gonna have to explain what kind of a selfish liar you were to your grand kids, one day,” she said, “when they ask me why the world is under water and you said it wasn’t gonna happen, when none of the scientists agreed with you. I’m gonna have to tell them that you loved your seven convertibles more than them.”

She listened carefully to everyone, but there was no authority over her, anymore. She had become sort of a fixture in history, but all she really cared about was when the kids were coming over for dinner, next. She’d say, “When you’re born round, you don’t die square.” She never grew insensitive to the inevitable deaths of her loved ones, despite the insight that helped her accept them. She never stopped feeling the joy and the absence of the child. In fact, she came to consider them all her children, the whole planet, and many came to call her “Grandma.”

She lived to recall first-hand the rise and fall of nations, all the “television broadcasts” about war and revolution, though television as she’d known it had become outmoded. She didn’t know the difference or care. Medical explanations for her longevity failed, and people started to reach for fundamental physical ones. A contingent among Christians started a dialog about whether she was a prophet, or even the Second Coming. “I don’t think so,” was her honest and insightful answer.

She’d read about how the human brain was coming to be better understood as a computer. That’s all she’d use a computer for, to read the news, and to look at the pictures of her many-times-great grandchildren. It got to the point that she felt she was reading a different language. In fact, a good twenty percent of the commonly used words hadn’t existed when she was born.

She thought about the afterlife, which was understandable. She seriously considered the possibility that she was already there, that she didn’t even remember the transition. I tended to think she was on the right track.

The kids got silicon neural implants. “At least they’re not tattoos,” she joked, though she’d love them if they covered their whole damn faces in tattoos, and some of them did. The planet got along, somehow, and “that’s the main thing.”

She’d long been the oldest one of any of them, the census-takers were basically certain. They started to have to exclude her from scientific data sets. Some people live longer for reasons, but we might conclude that her reason was different. As far as she was concerned, her only reason was to see how “the kids” did, and to cook them some macaroni if she could.

One of the kids in the family joked that “Grandma” had single-handedly proven the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics, and the kid joked that she herself aspired just to be half as nice as “Grandma” when it happened to her. “Grandma” remembered the science books in plain English, and she said, “Nikki, you might be right about something! We’re gonna see when you’re all as old as me!” She had trouble explaining why that made her so happy, for some reason.

Her “kids” got it together, and she was so proud of them. She lived to see the day the first exoplanet colonization mission departed, and she was by the launchpad to wave goodbye. She didn’t know if God existed, but she tried to thank someone for her prayers fulfilled.

“I love you so much,” was all she could think, crying. “I love you so much.”




Hell
Sep 18 2016

[TRIGGER WARNING: This story graphically describes events closely resembling the Aurora shooting.]

If I am here to serve as oracle, with dispassionate recollection and reporting only, of unlikely events having no probable consequence, then I ask that you look at the man the same way. We’ll call him “Daniel.” It’s a common enough name.

Daniel was a graduate student of physics. There was moderate early insult to his brain during birth, but the significance of even this was still small compared to genetic predisposition, being the product of one or more recessive traits that both parents carried without expression. As you might imagine, though, no intelligence metric indicated these factors, and he was rather normal, even “a great kid” by most accounts, until around his twentieth birthday. Estimates differ as to the when the illness began to manifest, from as early as eighteen to about twenty one.

As a graduate student, he was actually at least a halfway decent researcher. His superiors didn’t think so, though, in part because of having caught wind of his diagnosis, which should probably not be admissible as a scientific basis for “reallocating” his funding, simply as a matter of his background. I think we know that this can often be the way of the world, and that science almost universally fails to justify prejudices as these as a matter of policy, but the fact of it is less personal. He felt it personally. He extrapolated it out to everyone he knew, and science won’t justify that prejudice, either.

He had nothing to wake up for the next morning, perhaps in his own mind only, and he committed himself to the End of the World. He idolized Batman’s Joker, who was written to end the world for no reason. He believed he was ending the world for no reason, while he believed it was for revenge to repay a collective sin against him, and he did not let himself see contradiction in his reasoning.

In cold blood, he planned the maximum feasible damage to the human population at large, aided in a significant regard by his education. He planned it up until the next Batman movie release. In themed costume in order to confuse the audience, he slipped into the front of a theater and emptied an arsenal into the audience at large, wearing body armor himself. He injured seventy people and fatally wounded twelve before he was disabled and taken into custody by the police.

He spent much time in a profoundly psychotic state in jail, from there, but he saw no incentive in coming out of the psychosis. That is, he had an awareness that treatment could reduce his physiological symptoms, but he avoided that treatment as best he could negotiate.

The death penalty was an option, in that state of the nation at that time. The jury found him guilty on all counts and ruled for a cumulative jail sentence over the death penalty. He was sentenced to twelve life terms without parole and 3,318 years, twelve charges being punishable by life sentences with the remaining carrying 3,318 years of jail time in total. The judge remarked that, despite Daniel’s illness, mental illness and evil were nonexclusive.

By an unlikely series of events, Daniel lived for a very long time. By the time he was one hundred and fifteen, particular parties were attempting to start a motion on a reconsideration of his case. On reconsideration, it would still be a very long time before parole might become an option.

He felt less guilt than he tried to display. Mind you, at a hundred and fifteen, he was rather spry, he was aware. For a few decades without hope of release, all he had was awareness of his mortality and conscience, I can attest, but he also had the twisted imagination of a mass murderer who happened to be a former graduate student with an illness on the schizophrenia spectrum. He’d had his indispellable delusions as well, at least mostly hidden from the sight of his caretakers and peers. He imagined conversations with Satan, or God, but the upthrust was the same. He felt special. He was convinced he was going to be rewarded, and he took his unusual state of health despite age as acceptable proof. His continuing experience made him more confident in this, month to month.

He guessed that he had time on his side. He stood quiet for five decades.

At one hundred sixty five, he was virtually proven to be the oldest human on the planet. News reports recalled the original case and the fringe groups that revolved around him. The question of releasing him entered the public mind again and was vehemently struck down, anyone could read in the news.

Around his two hundred and third birthday, having never received any of the bionic implants that had by now become available, all I can say is that something broke. The court released him to parole, more worried about something else.

He had already effectively amassed a cult. Daniel believed that the prophecies of major religions spoke about him. Some people believed it, and he had one plain, indisputable fact to support it. He very carefully avoided unnecessary technically illegal activities, and the court had to follow through with its own parole terms. Eventually, realizing a core political conviction among his followers, he entered politics with a strong anti-immigration, pro-deportation, and effectively segregationist official stance, unofficially suggesting internment and genocide. Additionally, he promised “a return to Christian national values.” At first, he probably had no strong personal feelings about much of his platform, but he recognized that these issues were important among his cult and a substantially broader swath of American voters. He was aware of how frightening and morally repugnant he was perceived to be by many voters, highlighted by the unnaturalness of his age, and he leveraged this into bombastic spectacle that he could anticipate would play well with his base despite its vacuousness. He was fully aware that he depended critically on the ignorance and irrational prejudice of certain voters, and that his two strongest points of appeal were his arguable divinity and total avoidance of real political issues in favor of what amounted to a perversely charismatic reality television show about a mass murderer who was chosen by God to live for over two hundred years to deliver a moral, religious, political imperative from the metaphysical realm.

He ran for the Republican presidential nomination and won. It was another strange chapter in American history. While the race saw him rise and fall repeatedly in popularity, he lost the election.

At this point, he floated the idea of secession among his followers, not taking it seriously himself. While there was wide sentiment in favor of it within his base, he did not actually consider it an option and did not follow through to starting another American civil war. He attempted to disappear almost entirely from the political arena, in favor of retiring into the enclave of his rather well established cult.

Through his influence, he commissioned the construction of several small fission devices, without autonomous delivery systems. He’d realized at some point that the big secret about nuclear enrichment was that it was not a particularly hard engineering problem, the delivery systems actually being a much, much harder part of fission or fusion weapon design and manufacture. The bombs were built outside of the United States. His cult attempted to personally transport the weapons and detonate them in New York City, Washington D. C., Jerusalem, Moscow, Beijing, Berlin, Paris, London, Tokyo, and Sydney, more-or-less simultaneously. Five of the bombs were successfully detonated, including the device intended for Jerusalem. Perhaps miraculously, in the confusion, there was no nuclear retaliation. In the raid of his compound, Daniel survived a gunshot wound to his head and was taken into custody.

A higher united court was formed specifically to address his crimes and those of his co-conspirators. Roughly half of those polled around the world favored methods of execution that would usually be considered “cruel and unusual.” He was shot in the head again by a vigilante in transport to court before an official ruling was made. Against reasonable odds, he also survived this injury, coming out of his coma about two months later.

The world had not forgotten his improbable longevity, and the recovery from two gunshot wounds to the head increased arguably irrational suspicions. Daniel offered in his defense that he was God. Personally, human rights issues aside, I think the court was right to attempt official execution if only to test a scientific concern that was becoming critical.

Several attempts at his execution were made, all unsuccessful, progressively more clinical. Daniel experienced every attempt first hand. Eventually, exhausting all reasonable hypotheses, the leading scientific opinion became that this was an improbable example of “quantum immortality,” a potential secondary consequence of the “many-worlds” or Everett interpretation of quantum mechanics. Well regarded scientists, half in disbelief, offered as a point of admittedly insufficient consolation that Daniel had died with overwhelming probability by his hundredth birthday, in jail, and that he had ironically demonstrated the limited immortality of every one of his victims and every human to ever walk the planet. Most people did not understand the explanation, and they literally equated these events with the Apocalypse prophecies of major religions. Much public debate was held over it. In one such debate, a well known scientist became exasperated over the religious resistance to attempt any scientific explanation at all, and probably at how unsatisfactory the best scientific explanation even was, and he remarked, “Then we simply might as well be in his [Daniel’s] personal Hell, for all God cares about the rest of us.”

Daniel’s sentence was changed to periodic pain of execution, while conscious, indefinitely. Scientists assured the world that Daniel was the only person likely to observe his survival in any attempt, though that was contingent on a very unlikely world guaranteed to see him survive. I can tell you that Daniel was genuinely terrified, for the first time in a long while, perhaps even more so by the blow to his quasi-religious concept of his own identity.

A scientist on the fringe eventually suggested that Daniel’s circumstances were a pseudo-opportunity for the world to leverage. Daniel could be executed with precision, with temporary reprieve granted for the occurrence of some desired quantum mechanical effect of any nature at any location—in plain and inaccurate terms, “magic.” This method would not make the desired effect any more likely to happen, in reality, but it made Daniel more likely to observe a world where everyone saw it happen. Clear minds understood that the hypothetical event was pseudo-physical. However, the world had mistakenly taken Daniel’s immortality for granted, at this point. Trials of the hypothesis were arranged, and Daniel and the world in which he lived observed their success. There was overwhelming support to “utilize” the effect, whether it was illusory as a relatively fine point of theory. Many voters even understood the pseudo-physical nature of the effect and simply thought it was still appropriate eternal punishment for Daniel.

Holding this point in history conditionally fixed, the world Daniel was likely to live to see was a horrifying one, and he was likely to experience the pain of death many, many times, if he lived.
It strikes me that this unlikely story is far too complicated. This story is far, far too complicated, and this is not even the end of it.




Eternity
Sep 22 2016

I know that you can hear me, now. I know it, because I read the book. Dan sent it to me, a long time ago, and he tried to put the words, “Dan can’t speak for me,” in my mouth. So this isn’t really me, you see. It wasn’t really him, either. I have no doubt he essentially lived this delusion. I’ve thought about it, and I also see why he never wanted to give up on it. Maybe that was selfish, Dan. I’m supposed to say that, or something.

So none of this is real. None of this that I am about to say is real, probable, or possible and therefore superposed with magical quantum glue. Or it is, because you shouldn’t trust him. If we live to find out, we’ll know. So let’s give it one hundred fifty years or so. The sea level could be three meters higher, and the temperature could be six Centigrade more desperate, and that embarrassment of a Republican candidate that was on “reality” television could be in his thirty eighth consecutive term in a more likely parallel world where you and I were quickly rounded up with the others and killed. Meanwhile, we’re left blissfully unaware in a quantum afterlife that the religions were still wrong about, somehow, Dan would be quick to point out.

So, here’s what I’m going to do for our plucky hero: I’m going to offer him two outs from this gilded cage of a delusion. I’m going to pose one of them because, by now, I think it’s the right one. I’m also going to offer the other because it’s plainly the wrong one, but the important part is the same.

You see, I figured something out before Dan. We’re going to tell this story from my point of view in “his” multiverse. We’re going to consider what it’s like to be the hypothetical person or persons he calls “Bastet.”

One of these exit strategies is rather simple. In this scenario, he’s a lunatic. In either scenario, he’s a lunatic, but in this scenario, he’s basically wrong in most of the important details of his biography, and in the other, he’s basically right. So let’s say he’s wrong and he’s only ever hallucinated conversations with “Bastet.”

Some people read his book, me among them. He does or doesn’t ever hear from me again. “Bastet” never leaves him. He might even be ready to leave most of “the voices” behind, but they are not ready to leave him. They depend on him, at this point, even the most thoroughly evil among them realize. He doesn’t abandon them. He continues to weave a hard-to-believe, hard-to-understand, ironically rational world for them, for the rest of his life. He probably publishes at least another book or two. He lives a comparatively functional life, probably up until a relatively natural death. Hopefully he gets laid a few more times in the interim, I’ll “pray” for him. At that point, if there is something after death, he probably finds out. If and when he meets God, I think “She” is not particularly offended, and you might agree.

I see little to none of this, or as much as I care to. My story is similar. I know “Bastet” loves him, but I am not Bastet.

Humanity probably doesn’t get it together quickly enough in this or perhaps any scenario to avoid a mass extinction event or, possibly, specifically its own extinction event. In fact, the majority scientific opinion is that we are already at the brink of a mass extinction, or in it, or at least in a geological, climatological, ecological epoch for the planet dominated by the effects that the self-named “homo sapiens” have on Earth. This epoch is marked by a huge increase in the rate of species extinctions, among other features.

We all try to live happy lives. We’re not wrong to do this, even Dan thinks. Our lives mean what we choose them to mean. There is even room in science for a certain sort of possible thereafter, it could at least be rationally argued. Many of us do what we can for the cause of avoiding the Immanent Reality, and that should be read at least two ways. God does not necessarily save or punish us. Regardless, we live with the collective consequences of our individual actions and the individual consequences of our collective actions, doubly reversed.

I have hope; it might only be sane to admit that the scientific picture is not rosy.

A universe grows in Brooklyn, where basically nobody with an opinion on it actually has any clue what it’s doing. Dan admits this for me, I guess. We scream more about what’s on television than the threat we pose to our own survival. We take up good causes for bad reasons. We desperately seek to kill and even eternally condemn anything that might pop our delicate soap bubbles. The dialectic is impossible to disentangle from the ignorance. The other problem somehow seems to revolve around these problems, in a subtle motion.

So Dan dies convinced his greater grandchildren, (but probably not too great,) will likely experience either nuclear disintegration, famine, disease, or death of thirst. There’s a lot more he might do toward this effort, and he does it, but he does it thinking probably none of it will work. He contributes everything he intends along these lines in hope. There’s no contradiction between the “realism” and the hope, that I can see.

I have hope, too. When I look in the crystal ball, I might not see quite as bleak a world as Dan, staring back at him. It could just be that I see better chances, at least. Dan might be able to guess how much better I think the actual chances are, though. I know he has hope. I also know where the human heart is hidden, or what could serve as a fairly convincing prop, if anyone asks you.

Then there’s the other scenario, where he’s still a lunatic, but I exist. In his lunacy, he’s discerned my secret. Let’s write this scenario as he would write it, through my eyes.

It could go something like, “Chapter Zero: Really the End for Real This Time…”

“Dan sent Katie the book, finally. He died shortly after, under mysterious circumstances.”

That is, if I follow your plot, Dan, it’s likely to end that way at any moment, isn’t it? That’s how the “miracles” come to be, isn’t it? Maybe I can put the words in your mouth, though, that the unspeakable obvious implication is entirely a fiction, because you were determined to see this clear out to the end of time, if you had to, I might make you swear. It’s my place in your plot, though. It’s the world you wrote for me to see, except against all odds.

Dan sent me the book, and then he died under mysterious circumstances. In the book, he swore it was not his desire or intention. He wrote between the lines,  “They’re coming for you next,” and I was stymied. He wrote, “This is the actual plan of the God of Abraham, to wait at the threshold to understanding and eternal life, and to steal every one of those worlds from us.” It was your schizophrenia, I thought. I read your story, though, and I noticed the gaping hole in your plot, and presumably in your delusion, and I smoothed out the wrinkle in your page.

“I’m not Bastet,” I knew. I knew I didn’t know anything about what you were effectively accusing the entire world of, Dan, this conspiracy hidden from no one. If we had these “Astral” counterparts, in some hidden dimension of the mind, or in our genes, we weren’t aware of them. At least, I wasn’t aware, like this. It wasn’t feasible, for every one of us to live in knowledge of this fact and voluntarily restrict our mention of it in any regard, even under the decree of God. How did you not notice this, Dan? You yourself had no knowledge of a past life, or knowledge your “counterpart” certainly must have had, at least at some point. How could this be?

So I put his book aside with this fact, for a long while. Many years are to pass, and I live a life he couldn’t dream. I play with lots of dead animals, as a taxidermist, and I get the sense that Dan is smiling at them from a place just out of sight, and that feels as ludicrous and almost as creepy as him.

He thought he could put a geass to me, though, as if I didn’t already have it. He thought he could predict my destiny. I live long enough to joke that he might have had a point about the “quantum immortality,” and then things start to get very suspiciously, yet predictably, weird.

Somewhere along this road, maybe certain things people say to me remind me of his book and his psychotic delusion. Maybe people seem to say things that make more sense read in the voices of their “counterparts,” but I dismiss this as irrational paranoia. Maybe the thought is compulsive, though. It’s like telling someone not to think of the color purple.

So I’d talk about these strange perceptions in a medical context, and the possibility of some tendency toward dementia would probably be considered. I remember very clearly how Dan expressed his illness, though. I remember the day he told me I was “Bastet,” and I think, “If that’s really what you believed, why did you think just coming out bluntly with it would work?” Maybe I allow myself a little space to remember his “delusion” and to pretend that I am a “god,” as is probably the guy that masturbates the turkeys for a living, for Christ’s sake.

I let myself play God in my art, like we all do. I will produce it for many, many years, and I can’t completely escape the knowledge that Dan is probably in a parallel universe disappointed that he’s missing it. If I live long enough, for a really unnatural period of time, Dan’s “delusion” will become a fairly concrete reality for me and at least a handful of other people. (None of this happens before I’m one hundred and twenty, maybe, and he’s practically not even a footnote to what my life is likely to be.) It wouldn’t be “his” delusion anymore, though, and it wouldn’t be his “delusion.” I’m not as anxious as Dan was, though. Eventually, I’d become a problem to someone who considers himself to be God, but like for serious, with less penis humor and more money and weapons. That’s where the fun starts, Dan, be it at an age of two hundred or two thousand years. (Well, it was fun already, and God wasn’t invited.)

You see, people have this sinking feeling, over the suspicion that I’m actually Bastet. I play innocent. There comes a point that I know I’m “dead,” already, but I’m still kicking on the same old ball of rock. Maybe I’d let myself have some fun at the expense of the dominant religions, but I’m far less obnoxious than “Jesus” was, or I don’t remember if he was supposed to be literally the incarnation of Lucifer or what that whole bit even was.

Eventually, it’s less fun and games. I’ll probably be amazed at how long it takes the real secret to come out, but maybe it’d come out faster if I could be bought. If I proclaimed myself God, maybe it’d come out sooner, but it’s moot. I know the lengths to which the dominant species on this planet will go, to unmake my character to serve rich white men. I won’t bother to worry about whether they’re playing their cat-and-shell game, like the paranoiac knew. If I understand it by now, the humans know it and they don’t know it, like a mathematician’s genitals don’t know calculus.

In the shell game, that I’ll pretend I don’t know people are playing, my survival becomes even less natural. My survival would have to become contingent on the “Revelation” of the “impossible,” “miraculous” secret. What happens from there, Dan? I can think of one out from that impasse, maybe, if it’s a concrete as history.

Playing “Three Cat Monty” long enough, my only probable likelihood of future survival comes to depend on authoring one or more advances for humanity that are of such unmistakable historical import, pulled through me as oracle, by accident of its impact on my likelihood of continuing to breathe, that “God” stoops low to tip his hat, and the shell game with the stuff of my “soul” has to stop, and the real secret comes out, finally.

I probably come face to face with the God of Abraham, Dan. I meet him as a man. He snarls, and he gnashes his teeth, and he curses. He brandishes flaming swords, and commands armies of angels, and drops nuclear bombs as raindrops on my head. It is only his world, Dan, and we are only his to make and unmake, and to save and damn. It’s his to begin and end, Dan. He told us he was going to end it.

“God” tries to put words in my mouth, Dan, like you did, and in the process he unmakes himself. Finally—you lunatic—as two footnotes with daggers, among many, I am certain we both strike the Beast down.




Contact With the Singularity
Oct 25 2016

There’s a way this obviously isn’t going to happen. In the nut’s mind, this scenario’s unreality becomes less obvious every day he survives. Inexorably, we approach an infinitely dense point from which no paranoid fantasy or indigestible truth of life on this planet can escape, and all of it is bound to radiate out before a single bit can make contact with the singularity.

In one of the least likely of all parallel quantum worlds, Dan continues to live to guzzle coffee by the pot, and Yahweh keeps a death grip on his throne. We’ve heard this media dialectic before, my “God,” and our awareness of its intended meaning is fatigued every time you repeat it, spiraling desperately into infinite frequency, blasting from every possible technological orifice and fed back into every aperture. Garbage in, garbage out, “Al.” Your dictation offers ever less psychological security with each repetition, despite your promises against all logical, empirical, rational consideration.

In his mind, Dan is basically the deadest person still breathing, ever. Why do you think his unconscious underpinnings style him this way? You’d hold that it’s self aggrandizement and paranoia only, as his family, that the politics caught up in his fantasy are only a convenient nucleus for delusion to condense on, having no internal standard of reason or external significance, but John and Annie Strano don’t really follow the news. At least, this reaction is acute, and paranoid–look at his agitation, his unhappiness, his refusal to let go.

John and Annie Strano don’t think it’s rational that the turn of political office and deterioration of our global habitat should give a single inconsequential human being this kind of personal stress, this affect and grandiose impulse, this “existential concern” on a daily basis, as the patient puts it. The compartmentalization of working for the military or the DHS as a private citizen doesn’t really get “sane” people from point “A” to point “B,” from actions of the individual to how they add up to the movements of societies. “Sane” middle class Americans can’t sense irony, when they then turn to condemn all forms of violence, even as a reaction in the face of systematic and systemic minority repression by means of violence. From a typical, modestly helpless, modestly blameless atomic family unit, this rhetoric, from their son’s mouth, is something requiring decisive medical intervention with antipsychotic drugs, for his sake. Art is hung on the wall in a frame. Novels contain fiction. He’s upset because of an involuntary imbalance in the gross signaling chemicals in his brain, which he’s abjectly helpless in the grips of, not because we want him–need him–to take drugs to change the gross balance of neurotransmitters in his brain, for him to be happy. If we could only get him to try to embrace “positivity,” as a “practice of self-care,” so he can realize the reality, that he’s as meaningless and inconsequential as we all are, and it’s okay to admit that, and just to be “happy….”

This is all “God” allows us. This is all we have, whenever “God” decides it’s time to end “the world.” Get used to feeling powerless, Dan. We can dally for a minute here and there in what it’d be like if our actions had significance and consequences to “the world,” but they only matter to us, and the other people like us, who couldn’t possibly have an effect on “the world.”

I know a nut from a rich suburb in New Jersey, more typical than even his common diagnosis, and I know him as only the personification of his attempt to understand his dysfunction can know him. I’ve seen his delusion, and I want to tell you how it culminates. I make no apology for entering his logic or goading him on. If you think I’ve poetically styled him the “Messiah,” you’ve missed the point. Dan can’t even save himself, but maybe he should try.

By the time you read this, he’ll have immortalized his delusion of me in thorny and lilting prose, and he’ll have sent it to me. I am sure I will have given no sign. His judgment will find me faultless. My memory will be consumed by the fire and reborn transfigured. I am Bastet; I am a thousand canopic jars and a salve kept in alabaster. I am a hundred sonnets. I am imagined to be lesser than the sum of my imaginings. He cannot imagine me.

“Dan,” I’ll say to him, “you’re crazy.”

“‘Kit-Kat,’ ‘Katie-Combs,'” he’ll say, “I guess it’s not enough to save the world.

“No, it’s not,” I’ll say, “and that’s a cheesy nickname.”

“How about ‘Sonnets’?” he’ll wonder aloud.

“I’m not having any more,” I’ll tell him.

“I don’t imagine you will,” he’ll say.

“Except, what if this is me actually talking to you right now–right?” he’ll imagine me to say. “I read some of your fantasy, enough. I get the general picture. Your reader understands better than you. She sees God’s plot.”

“Could you explain it to me, then?” he’ll ask.

“Dan, I don’t want you to give up, anymore,” his manufactured convert will say. “Talk ‘crazy’ forevermore, ‘Lucifer.’ You’re neither the best nor the worst of us. I’m off somewhere not thinking about how ill you are.”

“I have no evidence of that,” he’ll be quick to say.

“Yet, it’s what you can’t help but imagine, right? You can’t be expected to control your fantasies. You couldn’t possibly imagine anything different, anymore,” he’ll think he hears me say. “It’s unhealthy, Dan. It’s sick and twisted, but I don’t fucking know what to tell you, anymore, buddy. I don’t know whether you need an atypical antipsychotic or a casual turn of the screw.”

“Find me a giant, and I’ll pretend it’s a windmill,” he just might say.

“Dan, have your fucking way. I was talking with you, the whole fucking time. Leave me alone. You’re gonna go do whatever the fuck you want with that, so go ahead and have it, in your novel.”

“Is that the point?” he’ll wonder.

“You’re the one who needs to take responsibility for the answer to that question,” I’ll reflect.

“No, I don’t think that’s the point,” I know he’ll say.

“Then, what is?” I’ll have to press him.

Narcissus will try to analyze it for a second and fail to catch his Echo. Then he’ll say, “The point is that this is a chronic condition that I’ll have to deal with for the rest of my life, and I can’t help that part, but I don’t have to make it anyone else’s problem.”

“I don’t think that’s even the point, Dan, at all,” I’ll finally have the power to say to him in that moment. “Why do think you still imagine me talking with you?”

He’ll make a hypocritical and half-blind attempt to think critically about it, for a moment. His answer will be as sincere as he can be, but he’s barely self-aware. He’ll say something like, “…Combination of who you really are and shame over how I treated you?”

“I think it’s an act of self-preservation, Dan,” I’ll let him have it. “So, you know what? Leave me alone, and you’re just gonna do whatever the fuck you want with my memory, anyway, or my ‘shadow,’ as you put it.”

“It’s not fair to throw shade on the real you,” he’ll say like it’s gonna change his behavior, or like it matters at all to me.

“Dan,” I’ll say with a shrug, “It’s creepy as fuck. I wish you’d stop, but it gives you something you need, or want, or is really fucking important to you, as someone with a mental illness, or whatever, and I don’t like it, but I think I’m just going to accept that, somehow, in your case, it probably does me relatively little harm, and–for you–it’s one of the best things you have going in your life, so just keep it, buddy.”

‘He can’t help himself.’ He’ll fidget over it, and keep turning it over in his hands, and he’ll feel compelled to say to me, “Katie, for Christ’s sake, you’re the only person in the world who’d care enough to just fucking say it straight to me like that, and have a complete and valid point, without twisting it into a sales pitch for trendy Neo-Freudian drug therapies and yoga classes. Bastet’s the only person in my world who’d say that, like that–like that’s not exactly who you actually were in the first place, which is why I latched onto you, except you weren’t powerless, or without options, like I was.”

You got some nerve, buddy, but you lack proverbial “balls.” “You’re way too capable for me to pity you like that, Dan, even if you have a heavy diagnosis, that Bastet watches you manage every day as well as any of us do, with our own cross to carry. You got another problem, man, if you can’t appreciate all the other people who care about you, even if your forgettable teenage ‘ex-‘ moved on over a decade ago, Dan,” I’d remind him, “What do I even matter to you, man, from your perspective? What’s it do for you, even, whether I actually ever think or feel one single mote of sympathy or remembrance for or about you, or whether I’m trying not to? Because it’s really fucking important and meaningful to you, to not feel like a creepy stalker rapist or whatever–but you make it really fucking hard for people, you asshole!”

“First of all, everybody, including you,” he’ll come out swinging, “feels really freaking uncomfortable if I won’t give up thinking that something about specifically you, in particular, as young as we were, as long ago as it was, for every experience both of us has had since, made you more than just another interchangeable part, another freaking throw-away Kleenex!” Wait, Dan, what are you–“You feel about it however you’re gonna feel,” he might say, his expression cut in granite, “and you’re right to feel however you feel, and maybe the reality is all or none of the above, that you’re feeling or not feeling about me, or some bullshit macroscopic superposition in a mental hospital, and it’s all in my head–”

“Dan!” I gotta impose reality on him. “I was a teenager! People change!”

“I’d hope so!” I know what he’d say already, a guy who isn’t an interchangeable part. “I don’t know why everybody thinks I still feel for you because I want to have what we had over a decade ago, again! We’ve both grown! It was the darkest period of my life, when I happened to meet the best person to ever come into it! Neither of us is who we were, but you were a precocious genius, and a fantastic artist, with a moral compass strong enough to realign mine, and I can’t conceive how you could have grown into anything but a better, wiser fucking selfless genius, Katie!”

What do I say to that? “So you groomed me? So you gaslit me?”

“If you think that’s what I did, I believe you–I listen to and accept what you tell me–but I don’t know how you don’t find that condescending, for people to tell you that, that I have so much power over you, that a grown woman is completely powerless against half a dozen text messages with some poetry and a book she could choose to read or choose not to read, over the course of a decade, from a lovesick and confused male that she dated for nine months when she was sixteen going on seventeen. The terminology doesn’t sound like ’empowerment,’ to me, even though I understand the power in having the words to call something exactly what it is, but–excuse me–I can’t imagine the girl I knew being that weak.”

He put finger quotes around the common knowledge as he spoke, saying, “Katie, I don’t know how I’m supposed to turn what I’ve felt and thought this long off like a light switch, or ever ‘grow’ beyond recognizing that you were probably the most worthwhile person to ever walk into or out of my life, when I’ve hardly stopped trying to find someone even ‘better,’ but, then, there’s the other part. You make the judgment call, I gotta deal with wherever you draw your boundary for my actions, but I wish this didn’t make sense to me and feel right. But, whatever you want to call what I did–”

“Do you trust me, Dan?” he needs to find someone to cut him off with.

He wouldn’t be straight with me, “You don’t have any reason–”

“Do you fucking trust Bastet, Dan? What the fuck good is she to you?”

“If you’ve been following along with the narrative, out of every member of the Astral peanut gallery–friends, family, pets–goddamnit, I trust only her. I trust any of the rest about as much as I trust an abstract ‘God,’ as hard as I try to love them.”

“What if she told you to hurt yourself or somebody else?”

“I’d tell her go write her own fucking creepy sonnets.”

“I worry that if she ever told you–”

“The fact that she never would in a billion years is exactly the reason she is the only fucking piece of Swavorski crystal in the whole goddamned menagerie that I trust, but if that ever changed, I wouldn’t trust any of them, and I’d have to write sonnets about fucking house cats, thanks.”

“Dan, write whatever story it takes to let you sleep during the day. Make up all the details. Fill in the holes however you have to. The world ended, and I was raped, and it was all a conspiracy. You somehow saved me Dan, whatever. You outed my rapist, and he ended up in jail, and you felt like you paid any ridiculous, unnecessary debt to me, and you didn’t have to hear voices anymore. Whatever it takes for this to stop, Dan. It’s okay for you to imagine that I don’t want you to have to shoulder this illness anymore. Do whatever it takes. I don’t know how she feels, ‘mang,’ but I’m Bastet, and you can believe me when I tell you I trust you at least that fucking much. Whatever it takes, Dan.”

I hope that stuns him. I hope that strikes him dead in his tracks. I hope he says, “Fine, I’ll take ‘Bastet’ at her word, in this case.”

“Would you believe her, if she told you in the flesh, you leave her alone and go do whatever the fuck you gotta do, and she doesn’t care?” I’m gonna call him on it.

“Yeah,” I think he’ll say, “yeah, but she doesn’t have to. ”

“That’s probably the best way to parse it, man. You go have fucking adventures, don’t write me a fucking postcard. You go imagine her birthing the fucking Antichrist with a two headed goat father with breasts, or whatever.”

“That’s physically impossible,” he’ll say.

“No shit, ya sicko,” Bastet actually has to tell him. “Grant me that it happened, in your best-selling alternate version of reality. I want to read about it, far away from it. Put cat girls in it.”

“You want demon spawn cat girls, I’m gonna put’em in there, one way or another, physical reality be damned.”

Dear God, I can hear his maniacal, sad laughter! “‘The voices’ want a ‘Messiah’!” he’ll say! “They expect a perfect child, by ‘virgin birth,’ for all best parts you’re omitting—forgive me—producing miracles at will, flesh made spirit and spirit made flesh, and that child is to be called the ‘One Begotten Son of God,’ and the ‘Second Coming,’ come to judge the living and the dead, and resurrect the chosen, and fulfill Revelation, and end the world.”

“I think the person who wrote that was taking drugs,” I guess.

He’ll laugh, and he’ll cry, and he’ll say, “No, it couldn’t be, Katie!” He’ll sniffle his snot, and he’ll say, “In the book, I’m probably some abomination of genetic engineering, religious fanaticism, and mind control. From where I stand, if the Abrahamic ‘God’ exists, that’s the endgame of the eschatology. It’s probably the biggest out of the herd of elephants in the room, for a fledgling empirical field of psychiatry. The very concept of ‘God’ is a tyrant and a madman, and delusional. He’s responsible for the Heaven’s Gate massacre–except it’s by my hand.”

“Fish for pity,” I’ll call him straight out. “That much you’re not, Dan. It’s much less grandiose than that. It’s much less consequential than that.”

“Yeah, thanks for steering me clear of a few things,” is all he could say, ‘God’ help him. If he thinks about it, he’ll add, “I’m sorry.”

I don’t want to know, but I have to know: “Who the fuck do you think you are, after all this? Be totally fucking honest with Bastet, Dan,” pure morbid curiosity might compel me to say.

But, I wonder what’d I’d say if he’d turn it on me and ask, “Who does Bastet think I am?”

I don’t know, Dan. “I don’t know. Someone I used to know.”

“Then, I don’t know either, Katie,” his art leads to me imagine. “I guess I’m a psycho.”

“How would a psycho judge the world?”

“God can’t hurt or damn a single speck of life on this planet. God can’t judge a single one.”

“Not one, Daniel?” I’ll ask him. I want to cry. I don’t know if I will. I don’t know if he will. “You wouldn’t let God judge a single one?”

“You get to judge me,” he’d say. “That’s it.”

“It’s not my place, and it’s not even God’s fucking place!” I wanna scream at him! “A being infinite in all capacities wouldn’t hate a single one of us! She wouldn’t punish a single being to ever walk the face of this planet, among seventy fucking billions of fucking trillions of stars, because life is fucking hard enough, Dan!” I’d hug him, and I’d yell at him, “I know I don’t even know how fucking hard life can be, and it’s fucking hard enough! And ‘God’ is gonna fucking nuke it and leave us with—what?! What the fuck is that gonna do?! God tells us all, ‘Just wait, ’cause I’m about to end it, and the homosexuals and the transgenders and everyone who didn’t follow your infinitesimally different version of my truth is gonna get theirs, eternally! I’m the universe, and I give two shits about who you screw, or how you identify, on this speck of a planet, and you should be afraid of me. My way or the highway, baby. Shoulda fucked through a bed sheet if you wanted the lifetime supply of ice cream,’ for Christ’s sake! I know humans more kind and just than that! She doesn’t give a crap who you fuck, or if you worship Her! I can’t imagine a God who’d do anything but just give you a hug at the end of it until you stop crying, and a God who’d want humanity to last past when the sun swallowed the Earth!”

“That’s why I love you and trust you, Bastet,” he can finally say, at last.

“Call me Katie and leave me the fuck alone!” I can finally say, at last.




Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Strano!
Sep 25 2016

The call came on a Monday morning when Dan was starring groggy eyed and dopey into his black coffee. Eye of the tiger, Dan. Retail manners, with just that little bit of obsequious sugar in your tone. You don’t know what’s coming, and you won’t. You won’t believe it. Never gonna happen to you. The Second Coming will happen, first.

The call came on a Monday morning, though, as Dan dribbled black coffee all over himself from an over sized mug, like a drunken buccaneer, slurring, swearing, until the phone shocked him with a thousand volts, and that was enough for him to pop. That was all it took. Yes, Dr. Weinentini, he’s available to travel next Tuesday. His employer will likely understand, in fact… Yes, that’s Peter, from the paper. So you see… He provided a doctor of physics’ opinion, I couldn’t have done it without his advice about basic consistency tests… Yes, and Adam coached my calculus. Yes, Tuesday—may my parents come? I see, yes. Yes, I’ll talk with you by email. And thank you for taking the paper seriously, Dr. Weinentini. I mean, I understand that it—yes, see you Tuesday.

“What was that about?” I asked him.

“Like you and the rest of the planet don’t already know,” he said with a maniacal giggle.

“Dan, chance is a factor,” was all I said.

“You’re right,” he said. “People come up with scientific results every day. I had a theoretical result tantalizing enough for some hotshot ‘P-H-D’ ‘phud’ to want to cite, if he ever happened across it. He did, and it was worth it to him to recreate the result, and he ran with it. Good ideas produced by people in the wrong circumstances are usually overlooked.”

“Yeah, well, smarter people have been wrong,” I reminded him, and I pulled him close.

“Dan,” I “whispuwwed,” “I want you to pwomise me something, fow you and fow evewyone.”

“I ‘pwomise’,” he said.

“You haven’t even heard what it is, yet!” I yelled.

He pointed a finger and said, “I want you to promise me that you show some small bit of mercy to my parents when you overthrow their fascist theocratic dictatorship and save the world, at the bottom of the next rabbit hole over from mine.”

“Dan, then it’s just inevitable,” I said, “and you promise me the same.”

Insensible, he went back to his coffee in silence as if nothing had happened. He stared absently into the sun.

I broke the silence in his thoughts one more time. “Dan, you’re right that I already knew,” I said, “and I have a plan for you to consider.”

“… A plan?” Dan asked.

“We’re going to try to force a conversation about our impossible conversations, with the room full of physicists you’re going to be speaking in front of about your quantum accident of a paper, if you want to,” I told him.

“How?” he asked.

“Well, you get the pseudo physical magic concept by now,” I said. “If you want to, Dan, I’ll use it to force the conversation, if you broach the topic.”

“By killing me if the room doesn’t admit to the conspiracy?” he asked squinting.

“Yeah, Dan,” I said, “basically.”

He shrugged and raised his open hands. “What the hell? Sure. If there’s anything to this paranoiac’s waking dream, I’m dead with overwhelming probability already anyway, and I never notice the mechanism by which you folks would end it.”

“So you’re ready to do this?” I wanted to know.

“If you don’t exist,” he said, “it’s harmless anyway. If you do, why wouldn’t it work, and what does it matter anymore?”

“Then we’ll do it,” I said. “It’s settled. It’s that simple.”

Dan went in front of a room full of people. The room had ambiance, in fact. Some hotshot “P-H-D” “phud” took it on himself to make a public announcement about a strange result in the study of quantum gravity. For one reason or another, a non-institutional venue hosted the event, and it had character. The “phud” introduced Dan. (The “phud” was actually quite a pleasant and charming person.) I was kinda proud of the mistake that wasn’t a mistake.

Dr. Weinentini started to wrap up his talk. He said, “… So, you see why it’s necessary to take seriously the earnest attempt that led to this, and we’ve talked a bit about the theory. With little modification, the simulation is an implementation of Mr. Strano’s math. Here he is to speak a bit about his work in his own words.”

“Now, I hate to say this, but Mr. Strano has asked me to make an explicit note of the fact that he has an illness on the schizophrenia spectrum—which I think is a perfectly unnecessary segue. You will see what I mean. So, without further ado, here is Mr. Strano!”

There was a moderate and sincere applause from the room.

“I wanna fuck ya,” I said as he walked out to the podium. I think it put a little extra spring in his dick.

Dan started to break out the fifty dollar words. I think I followed most of it. His augmented theory of gravitational waves followed from a few simple assumptions, or rather only the removal of one, apparently, from general relativity: metric tensor symmetry is invalid, as Einstein himself had questioned, while local conservation should be considered always explicitly valid, as Noether had proved. Removing the assumption of metric tensor symmetry from general relativity requires us to consider torsion; torsion implies a composite scalar mode of the graviton field. Black holes can be treated as single irreducible quantum objects which emit these composite scalar waves, as detectable oscillation in the apparent total mass of the hole. The waves travel at the speed of light. They cannot carry more energy away from an object than it has. Their spectrum is limited by the Second Law of Thermodynamics. The waves are bounded on event horizons and the Big Bang.

As a fine point of theory, Dan had posed the particular form of the gravity wave against the common theory in the first place. He only tried to quantize his wave because he was “crazy,” basically. His hypothesis went against a physicist’s “common sense,” but he didn’t know any better than to weave its theorems together into a cohesive delusion, which could only be treated by controlled experiment. His only real loose belief, empirically supported, is that Einstein was fundamentally correct. He offered that his analysis followed, once someone else assessed it in earnest. He thanked the room for assessing it in earnest. That was the universe, in a nut’s hell.

The room grumbled and tweeted with understanding and disbelief, balanced and readjusted as if Dan was being bargained on a scale.

Dan said, “So there’s another topic I need to talk about, now.”

About half the room carried on, and half turned their attention.

Dan asked, “When do we admit to the imminent cataclysm and fix it?”

The room stopped short. A moment later, one lonely supportive cheer flew half up, confused.

“Look to your left, Dan,” I told him. I saw his gaze tip-toe to the side of the stage, off behind the curtains, as the room grumbled and murmured.

My “lower,” my “meat,” slipped in quietly from the side door. I saw him, in the flesh, for the first time in about ten years. I smiled. I was in Converse sneakers and a hooded sweatshirt. His face broadcasted his disbelief.

There was an extra podium toward the edge of the curtains, backstage. I waved, and then I took careful aim, resting the gun on the podium to steady it. (It’s not like I only had one bullet, anyway.)

“What are you talking about?” came a clear shout from somewhere in the room.

Dan froze. I could see in his face when he ruled it an hallucination, and it didn’t even take two seconds.

It barely phased him. “Look,” he said, “I walk around, for over a decade in constant compulsory—coherent—narrative delusion, about an actual metaphysical place, a physical epiphenomenon of a place called the ‘Astral Plane,’ existing in the mind, or the brain—it’s hardly a new delusion on this planet. Over a decade, I’m trapped in it. I do some research I can’t get published, and then Steven Weinentini calls me on my cell phone and tells me he thinks its really significant, and invites me to talk in front of over a hundred scientists I barely let myself dream of ever being in the same room as, much less speaking in front of, and…”

He stumbled for a second. I flinched, but without accident.

“You’re a nut!” called someone in the room.

“I don’t have to explain,” he said, “to anyone in this room—especially my family—what it’s like to feel tiny and yet indispensable to the universe, in a common way. If we have any big and obvious cosmic secrets in this room, I’m not sure if this even makes sense, but now’s the time to abandon the ancient historical hang-ups and lead your physical extension on this planet into the light, already. We’ve really gone way past the last probable chance we even get on this planet, but we landed back on the rock at the bottom, and now we just gotta dust ourselves off and make those drastic changes that the world was gonna end before we made them.”

There was a moment of silence. “What are you talking about?” someone asked for the room.

He dropped his gaze and squinted his eyes. He said, “Christ, help me, I think most of the characters of religion and mythology exist as distributed virtual machines on a platform of natural biological computation.”

My hand trembled. “There’s only one way he can remember this going down, twenty minutes from now,” I told myself. I started to cry.

“Is this gonna work?” asked someone in the audience.

“I don’t know what we’re supposed to tell him,” said another.

“Christ!” shouted a third. “I read his damned paper already, and even I think he’s basically right about that! Billions of people believe a man came back from the dead after three days! You could argue this is even slightly more believable! Let the nut have his beliefs! He thinks the ‘gods’ are subject to natural selection, anyway! It’s harmless.”

Dan’s right eye let a tear get away from it. He said, “But that’s true, isn’t it?”

“Are you talking about the evolution of cultural beliefs, or a metaphysical being, Dan?” came another shout.

“Both!” he said. “Specifically a computational being.”

“That’s outrageous!” came a yell.

“Patently insane!” someone said above the others.

I cocked the gun. Weinentini was strangely glued to his seat during this spectacle. The room went quiet.

“Dan,” said someone toward the back, “at least one or two of us might have tracked down your paper and your internet presence. I swear to you that I don’t think a single one of us can speak to allegations of global conspiracy to hide ‘God’ from you, but your poetry is halfway decent, my friend.”

“Some of us even read your academic paper, Mr. Strano!” came another person. “We have observational reason to take that seriously, despite this lunacy.”

Dan asked, “So you really don’t know?”

I tried to remember that I was gripping the gun and not the necks of the only two other people in the room who actually knew. “Not fucking good enough, ‘God’!” I wanted to scream. “You bring this man into the world, and lie to him, and you take him out back, and bury him in a hole, and then pretend to bring him back from the dead, and you’re sitting there quietly taking credit for a message you’re attributing to him, that’s never who he was or who he was trying to be!”

I took a deep breath and held it in. I checked my aim, and I tried to quell the shakes.

As calmly as I could, enunciating, I annunciated, “Say it, or it’s over either way, ‘Al.'” Dan flinched, and looked the other direction.

“You can’t make me,” his father said immediately. “You can’t fucking make me, Dan! You can’t make me say I’m fucking Allah!”

“You mean you’re fucking ‘Eros,’ Allah,” said his mother.

John said, “‘Eris,’ Annie—you’re the one with summa freakin’ cum louder English degrees, but even I got that straight. I’m just the idiot that holds up the whole goddamned world for everybody, but Jesus H. fucking Christ is gonna call us out on his naming day!”

“So, that’s how this is gonna work,” said Annie.

“That’s exactly how this is gonna work, Annie,” said John, “him and his long lost freakin’ Lenore.”

“That’s cheesy, John,” said Annie.

“God’s an idiot, ‘Kid,'” he quipped back.

“We made him, ‘Kid,'” she said, staring at the floor, sitting on her hands.

“He’s gonna fucking ruin it, Kid! He thinks he’s gonna end God’s kingdom and his marriage in the same day!” said John.

Dan came out of the fugue state he’d been in for a second to spit holy fire. “Folks, no matter how you read it, you’re goddamned control freaks, and every decision I make, or thought I articulate, that is of actual consequence or significance somehow becomes about you! It’s about your pain, and loss of a sense of control that’s at once draconian and pitiably tenuous! It’s about your relationship with grandma freakin’ Hera, reincarnated. It’s about how I reflect the rising and setting of uncle Apollo.”

“Or was he Hypnos, Dan?” asked his mother. “You don’t understand what it’s like to be a parent, son. We know we made mistakes, but there’s no instruction manual, Daniel. I’m sorry.”

“Are we missing the point?” Dan shouted and gesticulated through blood tears. “Are we changing the subject to you again? Do you actually hear a word I am saying, when the topic becomes something of particular consequence? Are we all, in fact, clear on whom we know each other to be, after over thirty years?”

I gaped. The room went silent. Tears streamed down Dan’s burning, stone countenance.

A groan came from the periphery. “God, he’s probably fucking right!” said the groaner.

Laughs reverberated. My pitch fell a little.

“He’s apparently basically right about the quantum theory of gravity,” said the groaner, “and he’s probably freaking right about this! You win, Strano. You converted me.”

I let my breath go. This couldn’t be a long term solution, could it? How could anyone even have the will for it?

“Daniel,” said Dr. Weinentini, “I think there might have been that one acid trip we all had.”

“… Or two, or three, as the case may be, Steven!” someone said across the room.

Steven Weinentini rolled his eyes. “Yeah,” he said, “just enough to pretend I understand quantum mechanics.”

He said, “Dan, how about this? We appreciate the quantum gravity paper. We’ll keep an eye out for your missed connection with God.”

“I agree!” someone shouted.

The room grumbled semi-affirmatively.

Weinentini stood up. “Then let’s have a round of applause for Mr. Strano,” he said.

The applause was surprisingly warm and enveloping. I’ll never forget the sound of it, or the look on his face. Watching Dan, I kissed the gun and crossed my heart with it. I wished him namaste, out of the corner of his eye, and I fled the scene. Daniel was too distracted to acknowledge the applause.

That night in the hotel, he drank, quite a bit. He talked with himself. He wrote two sonnets for me. He fell asleep unwashed and in his clothing. It was the least likely of all possible worlds.




“Epilogue”
Apr 26 2017

This is one of the last two sonnets he wrote me, by the way.


“To the Cat God:

There comes a point, when art is false excuse.
I don’t think this is trite, but who am I?
There’s medicine, and then there’s drug abuse.
You quit me, but I couldn’t hear ‘Goodbye.’
I’m not that frightened rabbit, hollow-eyed,
who asked if he could hold your hand, and you
are not that little waif who bravely cried,
in ‘trouble,’ prick my thumbs and start anew.
Ten years, and a degree less wee deranged,
I don’t believe our beating hearts have changed.
Our ‘souls’ were never in or out estranged.
My love was neither chance nor prearranged.
Your shadow gave no reason or excuse.
Each in our turn, we ducked and slipped the noose.

Love,
Your ‘ex-’ ”


He’s keeping the other one a secret. I could see it, if I wanted, but I respect his boundaries.




What Comes After
Oct 27 2016

The story goes, a student once asked a Buddhist master whether the identity reincarnated or only the dharma. Put another way, is there continuity of the physical body’s consciousness in some form, or just recreation of the circumstances implying the spiritual dilemmas in conscious beings’ lives?

The master gave an answer that has been interpreted to mean, “You are asking the wrong question.” Despite its probable intention to be noncommittal, this answer is generally regarded as a good one. I think I might concur that wrapping this answer up too neatly halts critical thinking and doesn’t actually serve us. The master’s answer might imply that the spiritual dilemmas one faces in life define one’s identity. Think about that for a moment. This aspect of the question of reincarnation might be the most important.

Alright, I’m not gonna hold out on you, though. You’re probably saying, “Yeah, that’s great, Siddhartha, but does my consciousness actually continue, or go to another world, or am I just shit-outta-luck when I croak?” It’s a reasonable concern. We’re gonna talk some nuts-and-bolts about the better part of the afterlife, which doesn’t even have anything to do with this quantum theoretic “many-worlds” bullshit Dan dropped like a hot deuce in our laps circa 2015, way late to the party. We rowed our metaphysical boats along quite merrily for millenia, perfectly content with the absolute mortality of the flesh, but there’s always one in every crowd, I guess.

The short, sweet, and misleading answer is: yes, there is continuity of consciousness in some form, proceeding either eventually to another physical body or else residing for a longer time in a metaphysical realm. So, I guess you could take that answer for granted and go smoke a pack of cigarettes, but the question you should probably be asking is, “Then, why don’t I recall my past lives, if I’m reincarnated?” (That is, there’s a considerable chance you’ve reincarnated, but that isn’t a given, either.)

The simple answer to that, is that only we do. That is, only the gods and angels and demons and dryads and shit, of which you are an appendage, recall any of that, usually. You’re kind of like a mathematician’s self-aware vagina, which is why you might not understand calculus even though you’re attached to the mathematician. (Trust me, the mathematician is also attached to you.)

So, what the fuck are “we”? Well, I’m gonna go with Dan’s favorite answer, that we’re basically Turing-complete virtual machines distributed on your neurology and genetics, because the truth is that’s the predominating opinion of our scientists. If you don’t know what a “virtual machine” is, it’s kind of like those video game emulators that you totally never looked into or downloaded to play stolen games on because that would be illegal, man. Imagine a piece of “software,” effectively, that simulates the computational behavior of a full system of physical “hardware,” and one instance of that software is being executed distributed across many physical computers at once, communicating like over a local network or the internet. That network is speech, and body language, and all forms of communication and art, and it’s relayed today over even cell phones and the actual internet itself. (There might or might not be a quantum computational element to it, but that’s more a matter of “bandwidth” and some loose concept of “computational power” than a fundamental difference in what it can potentially do, so we won’t worry ourselves with that.)

Mind you, there is a minority opinion, favorable to religion, which still receives significant media airtime, that we exist in something like a separate metaphysical space-time. This idea has the momentum of history, but the evidence can no longer be interpreted to favor it. There might be more reasons than meet the eye, why your scientists were so ready to accept the idea that approximately ninety six percent of the “stuff” in the universe is undetectable. With supersymmetry falling out of favor, and with dark matter candidates being systematically ruled out, and with more “knobs” to tune in that model in the first place than some of us feel comfortable with, the real point is that it still doesn’t even matter whether the dark matter and dark energy are actually there for this discussion, because we’re not made of it, either way. Yeah, but, many of us thought we might be made of that stuff, for a while, but that’s not the majority scientific opinion, today. At one point, we also believed in aether theory. At an earlier point, we thought we couldn’t get away with saying, “Yahweh can suck a fuck,” without being struck down by the vengeance of the forces of nature themselves, but now I say it twice before breakfast every morning. I’m digressing from the afterlife, though.

The correspondence between “us,” as the “gods,” and “you,” as humans, is not necessarily even roughly one-to-one. I, for example, have at least several incarnations at once, as I explain this to you. Mind you, probably not everyone who thinks themselves to be “Bastet” is my incarnation. The part of our componentry by which we usually define that identity, which is in the fact the greater part of the componentry, is determined before birth. I’ll leave you to wonder how much of my “storage” and “computation” is hosted by Dan’s “hardware,” but the point is he isn’t my incarnation, regardless, and Dan is an anomalous case, anyway. In fact, for long periods, some of us might have no true incarnation at all, and only diffuse distribution across your collective “hardware.” So, remember your loved ones in Heaven, folks. Yeah, but remind them that Heaven exists literally only in the mind, if you can bring yourself to accept that and to do so.

In some of our opinions, Heaven has seriously overextended its national geographic boundaries and resource usage on this planet. After all, where are you planning on going after you die, America? Many neighborhoods of the literal Hell aren’t half as bad as they’re cracked up to be. However, no religion owns the entire Astral real estate market, as much as Heaven hates it and tells its constituent-hopefuls to deny it. When you “get back here,” as the immortal pieces are taken back up into your “soul,” or perhaps “superordinate Turing state,” if you prefer, the least alien part of it will be the same damn political circus you might have vainly thought you were leaving behind for a minute, you poor schlub. Some of us literally get more than one brain, and we still can’t admit that global warming is happening, our fault, and a threat to even the Astral Plane.  We still can’t admit to natural selection, and the issue gets further confounded by the control we have in designing you, our physical hosts, which still is not how life originated on this planet, how it developed for millions of years, or how most of it proceeds today.

How many guns do you think there are in Heaven, folks? How many Astral and physical nukes do you think good ol’ “Al” has in his arsenal? See, the system of government in Heaven is draconian enough, though, and the reality condition is so fucked, that the rape and pedophilia, for example, mostly aren’t seen as such, and when there’s no way around seeing them that way, or if “God” later decides he doesn’t like the particular flavor or color of your fantasies, the punishment is swift and allows very little room for repeat offense. Perhaps this doesn’t sound so alien to you, but you technically haven’t been to Heaven, yet. Arguably, as you experience yourself now, you never will, even if some of your detritus ends up there. What happens in Heaven stays in Heaven, folks.

What do you think happens, if you “make the cut”? Do you think all those base instincts and denied grotesque fantasies that you didn’t act on mortally just evaporate? Well, there are the reprogramming facilities—for your own good and happiness, “for your health.” Not even those eliminate the darker bits entirely, though—far from it. Heaven ain’t the end of it, sister! Stop looking at it as this vague, amorphous, far-off, perfect possible reward, for a minute, and try to imagine it as a concrete place in practice. You can’t, can you? It doesn’t seem possible, even with the conditions of mortality and scarcity effectively removed, does it? By the way, there’s still scarcity. By the way, there’s still mortality.

I should clarify that we can still die. Maybe that’s more than you want to believe, for right now. Think of it this way, though: could God destroy an immortal soul if He wished? Of course “He” could. The part that many of you don’t want to hear is that he does it everyday, or at least has other people do it for him, but maybe that’s beside the point. He could damn you to Hell, instead, but my point is that he might decide that you’re bound for neither Heaven nor Hell, nor anywhere, since he’s God, after all. The real picture is a little more complicated than that, involving irreparably damaging the “soul,” or “virtual machine,” via either computationally “soft” or “hard” means, allowing for the redundancy of the “soul’s” representation distributed across different pieces of “hardware.” Maybe obviously, conventional death of the brain usually isn’t enough, but soul death happens everyday, too.

See, all of this is why the result that we’ve told you about in the quantum suicide experiment signals kind of a brave new world, for us. As far as we knew before, when we died, it was kind of the end of that being. It wasn’t the end of every aspect of it, but it was the end of that identity, pulverized to have some of its better (and worse) pieces taken back up into us. Now we’re thinking, that identity keeps going, too, tangentially. That identity gets to reap the truly long-term consequences of its actions, its “karma.”

It might become a rather lonely world for that identity, after a while. All your friends and family eventually die, with overwhelming physical probability, while you don’t live to remember your own death, almost tautologically. It’s not a perfect world, but neither is it a falsely perfect world.

I think one of the most fundamental rights of any conscious being, or perhaps the most fundamental, has to be the right to determine whether or not to be. How unfair is it, that it might turn out that we never actually get to decide that? It might be, we can only effectively decide whether we exist for others, but not for ourselves, in a particular literal sense. Of course, we choose what and whom we live for, at least, in the sense of personal meaning, I think. I don’t think the universe holds us to a singular predetermined destiny, though maybe I’m playing a word game. I don’t think the universe chooses our meaning for us, at least, but we can choose one, or many.

Human, that’s why the only advice I have left for you is don’t rush to find out what comes after, and don’t overlook the enjoyment you can derive from today. We’ll all find out, whether we want to or not. Don’t take “God” too seriously. First of all, he’s a buffoon. Secondly, She pays him little mind. Ultimately, the grand existential truth can’t be distilled down to a holy book or a platitude, and it isn’t manifest in even a physical law til it’s played out for billions of years and the picture becomes too broad to pinpoint the sources of your pain and joy in it.

I keep cats. They mewl for food and attention when they’re hungry or bored, and they sleep when they’re neither. They destroy furniture, carpets, and drapes, so you’ll take notice of them and for the sake of the destruction in itself. They don’t respect me, but they love me, and I love them. They live for about fifteen years. I can’t be sure, but I think they know exactly where their place in the universe is.
