"Polyphrenia"
(Various Early Experiments in Taxonomic Prosody, Essay, Dialog, and Short Storytelling)
Daniel Strano



SECTION I: Poetry


Prayer to Tyche
(Circa Summer of 2009)

Tempestuous Fortuna,
Be gentle with me.
I yield to the gusts of your bellows; buffet me not too hard.
I bend to the strength of your touch; do not break me.
I commit my vessel to the throes of your ocean; see me home.

Even-handed Fortuna,
I entrust myself into your keeping.
Give to me and take from me in turn.
Give me a chance, that I may have a hand in my destiny.
Take from me all sense of entitlement.

Sweet Fortuna,
Be my advocate to the Fates.
Pray that their hands be supple with my thread.
They know me for what I am.
You know me for what I might be.


Because I Wrote It Twice
(Circa Fall of 2010)

To the Cat God:

Perhaps here, in a linen city beside a river of indigo
Set in sugary sands that cloy like the touch of velvet,
Under wisps of numen woven ’round a bone button moon,
Wearing your banner, the color of crocus,
I shall find another no less than you in stature,
One just as kindly, to lead astray.

From a lab rat.


Underneath or Above
(Circa Spring 2011)

Oh, it’s strange to be written a poem,
by a guy when you don’t hardly know’m,
and he only just barely knows you.
What a muse-unexpected to do?

If they’re cute, and he knows how to crank’m,
it’s enough to decorously thank’m,
by enjoying and being amused,
even if he’s a little confused.

For a poet ain’t much of a lover,
in a bed with a girl under cover,
but he knows one good trick: he can rhyme “limerick,”
whether he’s underneath or above’r.


Antimony Pill
(Circa Summer 2011)

I would drink of you to intoxication.
I would be the stiff sip in your glass.
I would shield you in even my vitrification.
I would love you when drunkenness passed.

I would stand between you and the venomous dart.
I would throttle the asp that attacked by the heart.
I drink poison for you. On bitters I sup.
Just don’t look away when I spit them back up:

Arsenic, cyanide, formalin aldehyde—
With my sweet syrup lilting like medicine’s cloy—
Hyaluronidase, phosphodiesterase
Is the stuff of this cancerous, timorous boy.

I ate out your tumor; you stood my harangue.
We swallowed the tonic. We danced and we sang!
The worst poison of all is what’s stored in my fangs,
But a friend in great joy is a friend worth great pangs.


Another One of My Self-Important Poems
(Circa 2010 to 2012)

Words.

Another word.

I’m sure you’re all so sick of words.
Fair Narcissus lays dying.
Send a kind word to his mother.
The pope has fallen ill.
Say a word of blessing in your prayers.

When the bomb drops,
I will throw words at it.
I will strike it with my magic wand.
I will look for answers in a deck of cards.
I will curse your name.

Failing a miracle,
I will pour words on the ashes,
and I will say,
“I would have rather said ‘accept,'”
“I would have rather said ‘forgive,'”
“I would have rather said, truly, ‘love.'”
I would have rather said something of beauty.


The Smallest Vibration Has No Master
(Circa 2009 to 2010)

Because one lives one life
it might lead one to think
that fate’s a straight and narrow fare
that one walks blinded, gagged, and bound
for one inevitable end
obscured by only wanton lack
of a complete and perfect map
behind the lids of one’s closed eyes.

Open them.

From where you set your step
is whence the path proceeds,
but the ways of fate are numbered
like the digits of a hand.
God’s fist is loosed to roll the die,
to pluck the single shining ray
reflecting on a far-off place
to light upon an open eye.

What do you see?

A song sang in a distant hall
is reaching its crescendo–
listen.

The pitch pervades the rolling air
cascading, growing ever fainter,
’til the quietest emphatic whisper
touches on a listening ear
and sounds a single roving note.

What do you hear?

A chunk of frigid rock and ice,
the amnion of cosmic birth,
hurtles through the upper air,
burns to a trifling, meager speck,
and falls upon a far-flung sphere;
put a bare foot to the ground.

The gentlest wave
emanates on impact,
permeates the earth,
bounces off its iron core,
echoes to the surface,
passes through your sole,
travels to your chest,
and drowns
in the beat of your heart.

What do you feel?

The smallest bit of being mocks at destiny.
The quantum has no determined course.
The atom is free.

Fate’s foil
is in the dim,
the faint,
the gentlest palpitation,
the microscopic specks of dust
only having consequence
in a moment when all else is stilled.

Blot out the sun.
Silence the drone.
Halt the turning of the earth.

What do you want to do?


You’ll Know
(Circa 2011)

Fortuna,
Forgive me.
Heads or tails,
I’ll do what I want.
Call it in the air;

Wrong or right?
Fire or ice?
Dextrous or sinis–

I missed the catch.
Maybe I didn’t.

A wise person once said,
“When you see a fork in the road not taken,
you’ll know.”


The Butt of the Joke
(Circa 2012)

I would have you laugh at this poem.
Human nature is a limerick.
It rhymes lyrically.
It anticipates a punch.
The last line is a real killer.

“There once was a woman who ducked it…”
–But three lines later, she fucked it.
There’s a pun in the middle, that’s kind of a riddle,
‘Til the wringer lets go of her tit.
“Perhaps, you were trying to suck it!”
…Is the thing you might say, so we all feel okay
When the butt of the joke kicks the bucket.
(“I think that she came from Nantucket.”)
She was fragile at core, and you called her a “whore”
‘cause she’d deep-throat your bill if you’d tuck it.
“…In her slippery crack with her thong?”
“…In the same hole that swallowed my dong?”
Then to cover our shame, we’ll throw dirt on her name,
Laugh about it, then all hit the bong.
“You and her can both suck on my schlong.”
And she did, ’til the joke went all wrong;
You called her a “derp” ’cause she gave you the herp’
For that bill and the price of a song.
“…But there’s no way she actually did it.”
…Felt ashamed enough to admit it?
‘Twasn’t something she chose, so she just wiped her nose,
Sucked the shaft of a gun, and then blew it.

“…But there’s no way that she even knew it!”
“…Unless, you’re the one who would do it.”
…Tell her just what you said? Man, it’s all in your head,
But you called her a “slut,” and she knew it.

She knew it.
She was vulnerable,
But she wouldn’t suffer me saying that.
She didn’t need my pity,
But she would have loved it if you’d said a kind word for her instead.

I would have you laugh at this poem,
Because human nature is to exaggerate,
To twist unrelated events
Into unfunny polemics
Bearing no relation to the joke that spawned them.
Everything’s a joke.
The people who write our laws are a joke.
People who love cats too much are a joke.
This poem is a joke.

Human nature is a limerick.
It rhymes lyrically.
It anticipates a punch.
It’s so scared of a punch
That it targets the weakest person in the world
With a cruel joke
To feel better about itself
Consistently
When it knows that it’s in a mean spirit,
When it would appreciate a kind word for itself
When it becomes the butt of the joke.

“There once was a man who blew smoke,
made the weakest among us wear yolk,
‘Til he fought for a friend, ran afoul of the trend…”
And the last line is a real killer.


Sic
(January 31st, 2012)

I step out to smoke a cigarette,
and I realize I’m up for the last sunrise of the year.
I’m thinking about how dirty the Jersey air is,
and the colors of twilight creep on me.
The sky is dirty,
but there’s life sleeping in the trees and shrubs.
I feel like I’m Janus in a mirror,
like birth is ahead of me
and rebirth is behind.
I’m all weirded.
Then this white-tail fox
walks through the yard
coming within about 20 feet
watching me take a drag
doing its thing,
and I’m just doing my thing,
and it passes,
and I hear a squeek in the bushes
where I watched it go.
I figure I should write a poem about it.


“I can’t come in to work today because the globe is warming.”
(Circa Summer 2012)

What glamour do we garner? Except, to refuse,
aware our arguments will not connect the dots
between the things we have to carry and the waste,
between that plastic bag and wars we fight for fuel,
between the leather seating and the rights of cows,
between the learning and the standard normal curve,
behind their tired eyes, the cells that do not click,
and the impossibility of peace on earth,
we can fulfill, so quietly, our promises
to self, and god, and family to do what’s right
without the threat of wrongly being bought with praise.


Breaking Form
Nov 23 2016

I do not hate Creators or the Son.
I do not hide from light or love for shame.
Just look, and find the All in anyone;
the tetragrammaton is not its name.

Dear Yahweh, if your love is without bound,
why must my brother hide his love of man?
Is this your will? Which way to read is sound,
of Torah, Talmud, Bible, or Quran?

If any way is true, then show us now.
Our children die, for how you spell your name!
For many years, I might have called you “Tao,”
but now I think your way is not the same.

Why do you punish ants, and give them crowns?
Of billion trillion stars that we may see,
why come into our little country towns,
see love and faith, say “Give it all to me”?

Our world is just a speck, a mote of blue,
so why do you intend to see its end?
What god above was small enough to you
that, after all, a half of us descend?

Why do you care? For love? Then “save” us all!
Speak clearly, for the writing’s on the wall.


Bitter Love
Jan 23 2018

It would taste
like artificial cherry syrup,
it would look
like FD&C Blue #1,
(“the flavor of technology,”)
if my words were sweet cane to your eyes,
if they cooed like
the perfect mother
in your burning, innocent ears,
nursery rhymes
with no higher ambition
than for you to be happy,
with the mouthfeel
of a candy shell
rather than the alkalinity
of a bitter vegetable
“Mom” made you eat.




SECTION II: Prose


Holden Caulfield’s Five Paragraph Essay on Why The Catcher in the Rye Should Not Be Taught in High School English Class
[Daniel Strano is always writing his name on my essays, but he's not a crummy guy.]
(Circa 2010 or before)

My teachers have a lot of nerve. First, they kick me out of school. Then, I drift around the city for awhile wondering how I’m supposed to tell my parents that I got the axe again. It’s practically Christmas, for chrissake, and they had about two hemorrhages apiece the last time I failed out of school. I didn’t think that any of us could take it again.  I get beat up and robbed, and I feel like I’m going crazy. They tell me I’m having a nervous breakdown. I end up in this place full of dopefiends, borderline cases, and phony doctors who want to medicate me into being a good little prep student. They give me electroshock and these horrible pills. I wander around the place like I’m dead. All I can remember is doubting everything I ever knew, and hating myself. I can’t even think for God only knows how long. It’s like a nightmare, except I can’t wake up. I feel like I’m going to be there forever, like that’s where my story ends. It’s like I’m in a dime-store paperback and that’s where the author decided I belong in the end, and that’s how the ending stands til the end of the universe.

Then, I do wake up. I come out of the fog. It’s like I run right off the last page of the book, and I realize I’m right back in goddam high school English class again. The teacher is going on and on about my story. It’s right up there on the list of required reading material they make us write all those lousy five-paragraph essays on again and again. It’s horrible. It’s like Shakespeare really started out writing a million five paragraph essays with a goddam thesis statement in the first paragraph and a conclusion that says the same exact thing in the end every time, and that’s how we really got “King Lear” and all. The worst part is my classmates don’t get it. They don’t get me, I mean.  Some of them kind of get all the stuff the teacher always makes up about a book in high school English class, like I wore my hat because I was thinking that it was really some kind of profound statement about adolescence. I don’t know, I guess it could have been. My classmates kind of get that. They kind of get that stuff, but I don’t think they really get who I am. The ones who I think might get my story, the ones that might really get me and all, they don’t read the book.  They don’t read anything the teacher assigns. The ones who do read it talk about me in class and act like they kind of feel bad for me or something. Then they take out their style guides and write book reports on me, with a thesis statement in their first paragraph that’s always restated in the last goddam paragraph so they can get full credit, something like “Holden Caulfield is the epitome of teenage alienation and that’s why we should all have to write five-paragraph essays about him all day long,” and it just makes me sad. It’s sad-making, that they have to write about me like that. Then, there are the kids who just hate me. They’re the phonies who always hated me. They write their five paragraph essay, and it’s exactly 500 words down to the absolute last word, for God’s sake, and they spend more time making sure they put all the lousy punctuation in the right places than really writing the thing. They have exactly five direct quotes out of the book, out of my mouth, and one of them is at least three lines long so they can have a quote with an offset margin like the teacher wants. They dot every “i,” and at the end of it all they just hate me, fucking phonies, and they get “A”s on their papers because they’re 500 words down to the word and all, and they used 27 words from the vocabulary lesson in it. Then, they grow up to become middle-managers for the companies you hear about in “Forbes,” because that’s really the only reason they even read The Catcher in the Rye in the first place, or why they ever read anything in their whole phony lives. I don’t read “Forbes,” but I bet they do just so they can know who to work for.

It’s like I’m going to live forever, and this is where I’m going to spend the rest of my life. I’m going to live in high school English class forever.  The teacher tells everyone to read my story, because she thinks it’ll make the kids feel less depressed or something. It’ll make them feel like they’re not alone, like I’m a friend they could call on the phone and talk with for hours when they’re feeling low. Except, you can’t tell a person that it’s really alright to hate school when you’re in English class. You can’t make them like me if they don’t feel like I do, and you can’t tell them to be like me, when you tell them not to drink and smoke and swear and they have to do all their homework and everything. You can’t teach me in English class. You might want to, you might even really mean well, if you’re an English teacher, and one or two kids might get something out of it. I hope they do. I hope somebody feels better when they read about me and all. All I ever really wanted to do, was I wanted to save kids from English class, and from being graded, and from growing up to play some phony “game” all their lives just to make money. They have to read about me, and the teacher tells them it’s alright to think that people are phony, and then they have to do their homework about me.  How are they supposed to see through my eyes and then write a book report about it so they can get an “A” on it and grow up to sell Amway? It’s ridiculous.  It’s like the psych ward, but worse. It’s like I’m in purgatory, or hell, even. Kids are going to write these sad little five paragraph essays about me forever, and I can’t even stop it. I can’t even do anything at all about it. All I ever wanted to do was make them feel like I really got it, like I really got them. I wanted to tell them they were right all along.  I can’t even do that. You can’t do that in front of an English class. You can only do it when they stop doing their homework, when they stop putting up with all the phony bullshit the world forces on them, when they stop playing the game. I’m no Jesus, but it’s almost exactly like what they did to him. He had a good idea, he hated the phonies, and they nailed him to a goddam cross for it. Then, the phonies turned around and started a goddam church to him, like they were all sorry about it, but all they really wanted to do was completely change everything he meant. I don’t mean to say I’m anything like Jesus. Really, I’m not. He was probably a lot more loving and smarter than I am—I’m sure he was. Except they teach kids about him that way, too, and I know he would have hated it.

I feel bad for the English teachers who want to tell my story. Really, I do. A lot of them probably really mean it. They figure they have to play the game, but they don’t have to play it all the way. They probably want to tell the kids that the whole class is phony, except they can’t. They’re the teacher and all, but they probably think there’s a whole lot of little Holden Caulfields running around, getting into trouble and getting the axe, and they want to save them from the world. They probably feel bad for the kids like me. Maybe they were like me when they were young, and that’s why they want to grow up to teach The Catcher in the Rye in high school English class. I really feel bad for them.  I never hated most of my teachers. I thought some of them were a little phony, but I liked a lot of them anyway. I knew they were just looking out for me, most of them. That’s probably why they’re teaching my story, now. I feel bad that they couldn’t figure out a way not to play the game at all, though.  Maybe it was the best they could do. Maybe nobody really knows how to fix the world, and that’s why that Salinger guy ended the story he wrote about me on such a down note. I bet he might have really wanted a way to end it happily, but I didn’t know how to beat the game in the end. I don’t think anybody does. Maybe he figured he could beat it by telling my story, but people just teach it in English class, now. It’s just so goddam depressing. You could write a book about a guy who drops a nuclear bomb on a school, and if it was any good, if people thought it was really worth reading, they’d just teach it in English class and tell you not to blow up the school, by the way. That could be the point of the whole book, for chrissake, because the author really hated school, and they’d pick what they wanted to teach you about it. They’d say that the bomb was just a symbol for teenage angst or something. The English teacher might even really want to blow up the school himself, but he couldn’t teach you that. He might really want to, but he’d tell everybody that they should grow up to be a high school teacher if they really wanted to change the school. Half the kids wouldn’t even read the book, I bet, because they already hate school. The other half would feel sorry for the guy in it and act like it wasn’t his fault, like he didn’t really mean to drop a bomb on a school or anything, and one bourgeois phony who hated the book would write a five paragraph essay on it that was exactly 500 words long. She’d even get an “A” on it, for God’s sake.

I should probably start this paragraph with “In conclusion,…” because the teacher and I can both count to five. That’s exactly what I hate about school. I’ll bet the phony sonuvabitch who writes the paper that’s exactly 500 words long started this paragraph with “In conclusion,…” and changed it when the teacher told us today that it’s “weak writing.” She probably wouldn’t have even known that if the teacher didn’t tell her, but she’ll use more words from the vocabulary lesson in her paper than anybody else. Then, she’ll restate her thesis, and it’ll have nothing to do with who I really am at all. I haven’t even gotten to a thesis, because anybody who actually read the book we were assigned could figure out what I was talking about. If I had to pick a thesis, it’d be this: “The underlying message of Salinger’s The Catcher in the Rye is unavoidably skewed by presentation in the context of a classroom, while the prevalence of its assignment to high school students actually indicates the frustration of adults with the ‘game’ and suggests the penultimate vindication of the ‘bad student’ and precocious teenage insight.” It’s a run-on, but I’m supposed to state the whole idea of everything I want to say in one crummy sentence. I can’t, though. I can’t even do it in five paragraphs. I feel sorry for the kids who have to read this book. I liked it, though.


Science as a Contemporary Human Endeavor
(Daniel Strano)
2012

I entered formal study towards a degree in physics with both a desire to produce something of general practical value for human beings, as well as an admittedly spiritual motivation to better understand how the world of which I am a part works–whether I like how it works or not. As a graduate student, I took away from instruction that my “type,” which is apparently someone ultimately more concerned with the latter motivation, can’t cut the math. The idea of personal philosophical fulfillment, garnered along a course of scientific study, the primary thrust of that study being to produce results useful to other human beings for more than just a sense of philosophical comfort, seems to be suspect or distasteful to a significant contingent in the physics community.

I sat in classes on topics that were “so easy, even an English major” could follow them—having started my full-time undergraduate studies as an English student. Cracking a joke about “those damn engineers” is likely to get you a laugh in the physics department, and my honest assessment is that aspects of the professional humor really aren’t meant “that way,” truly. The engineers and mathematicians—and even the “English majors”—make the same essential jokes, except the English students have a better command of verbal irony. Sitting in those classes on subjects often popularly regarded as “impossible for a human being to understand,” such as quantum mechanics, the mystique of talking heads with I.Q.’s of over 9000 on the Discovery Channel assuring me of the existence of dark matter and dark energy started to dissolve.

Ultimately, maybe I’m the “failure.” I was the 13th admission in my entering class. Someone might say I “don’t truly understand the material at all,” I’m “new-age,” my GPA was 2.9-ish with a 3.0 required, and I ultimately dropped out. I quit without getting the piece of paper, so maybe I’m just the crack-pot that never was. My reasons for quitting were social ones, though, in my understanding, when I chose to leave a formal community of physicists who are just as human as any person working any day-job. When I weighed incentive against ideological compromise—yes, ideological compromise—I anticipated roles in which I suspected I could both do more for the people I share a planet with and be better personally fulfilled, while continuing to study physics.

I can’t speak as a doctor of physics. I can’t speak as even a “master” of physics. I can speak as someone who has always considered himself a self-motivated student. I can speak of myself as someone who took college level electives in philosophy, sociology, economics, and psychology before graduating high school. I can tell you that I’ve read Eliade, Marcuse, Einstein, Feynmann, Agrippa, the Tao Te Ching, the collected works of Carl Jung, Frost, Salinger, and I can continue to drop every name that highlights the fact that I don’t have the appellation “Ph.D.” attached to my name. I could list my standardized test scores (the good ones), my work credits, and I can continue to dig my hole straight to China, and all of this is perfectly meaningless and can be held against me. I leave it to your power of reasoning, as a human being with an intellect that I say is as sharp as any scientist’s, that appeals to authority status may mark but do not confer understanding and that the only measure of truth is direct evaluation of theoretical consistency and its empirical support.

Science is a day-job, with specialized knowledge being gained from daily immersion in the work in much the same way that work-specific knowledge is developed in any daily work routine. The scientific community is composed of average human beings operating in a contemporary historical context, with the same social, political, religious, and personal hang-ups as the general human population, except that we might have been encouraged differently and ultimately chose to specialize in the sciences. Compartmentalization of scientific work results in the same sorts of essentially bureaucratic weaknesses of oversight between scientists as between teams in private corporations. As in any line of work, there are social in-crowds and out-crowds, and open discourse is sometimes stifled by social anxiety, including the fear of losing respect in the eyes of people whom we would like to accept us as peers. It should stand to any person’s reason that an attempt at an objective study aiming to produce useful results for human beings can be hurt by the simple reality that scientists are human beings. That being said, “us scientists,” or “them scientists,” are typically as nice and well-meaning as typical human beings.

I love them, but it’s strange to see a lot of the graduate students I studied with interact with each other and professors in the department. Doctor Been-On-TV-With-Morgan-Freeman is such a “genius,” Doctor Studies-Dark-Matter-At-an-Ivy-League-School was such a “genius” when he took time to speak with us out of his busy schedule of saving the world with the power of science while secretly fighting crime at night, and I’m not even intelligent! I’m never gonna pass qual’s! (That’s what we call the test that “qual”-ifies a student to progress to doctoral study.) I don’t mean to embarrass anyone, but you don’t understand how often and how strongly I had to restrain the urge to hug my classsmates and try to tell them that it really isn’t like that at all, that they are wonderful human beings whose real value is still not encapsulated in the academic metrics. I wanted to scream lovingly at them that we’re still human beings on planet Earth flinging around the idea that we really nearly have the ULTIMATE-GRAND-UNIFIED-THEORY-OF-EVERYTHING-WITH-FIREWORKS-SHOOTING-OUT-OF-ITS-VERY-NAME this time, unlike every other moment in human history. It’s the same as when we couldn’t speak the holiest ultimate four-letter name of God that contained the essence of all that is. We have thought this exact same thing at every point in history, because it was the then-present time proceeding all human history up to that point, and not the previous second from which we had viewed all then-preceding human history a second earlier, nor the next second in human history from which we would be viewing all preceding human history, etc., etc., I love you. (“I get what you mean, but we really nearly have the complete physical theory at least, this time! You gotta hear Brian Greene and Michio Kaku talk about it on the Discovery Channel!” while, we can impress each other with qual problem answers over a beer, but we still can’t talk about quantum ontology even at the bar without someone calling “hippie bullshit.”)

As graduate students, I think we all project a greater or lesser degree of the image of talking heads on the Discovery Channel onto our professors, and we project the potential to become such talking heads disproportionately onto many of our classmates compared our self-assessments. Then, most of us pass hurdles. Some of the projection is dispelled while some of it is reversed onto others. Maybe it isn’t surprising that, with my long hair, occult tattoos, and (essentially atheistic) spiritual interest in physics—as oxymoronic as maybe I don’t seem, across the breadth of the department—I often anticipated the worst of this projection. I set myself up for it, and I so obfuscated my ability to assess this aspect of social reality between paranoia, apologeticism, and epistemological rationalization, that I ended up only knowing that it was healthier to extract myself from a situation I couldn’t analyze objectively. Graduate school is high-stress, isn’t it, folks? I’m not sure what you thought of me, but believe or not, I was pulling the 12 to 16 hour days as well, or did you folks work even harder? Could you empathize if I said I came away from certain work I did for grades thinking that I wasn’t always treated fairly, while I thought people cut me slack in other places? But that’s perfectly typical for a student, and it was water under the bridge, because I finally found an advisor I could work with, whom I still think is a great person and scientist. Then, I was asked to grade other students who were like myself and my graduate classmates, and I imploded.

There’s no great revelation, here. We’re still on planet Earth in the year 2012. Human beings are still talking about the theory of everything of the moment, the end of the world of the moment, the grave completely inexcusable injustices of their own particular sob-story but absolutely nobody else’s, etc., etc., and I just want to remind you that I love you.

I want to try to offer this idea to a community of my friends: constriction of the universe of discourse due to perfectly human social anxiety is the biggest impediment to our progress as human beings trying to understand our world.


Forever NES
2012

Video games have been a warm and fuzzy comfort in my life for almost as long as I can remember, like a well-worn teddy bear. My dad was a gamer, though gaming seemed to hold a different significance for him in the context of his generation. At five years old, I had a vague idea that he was a “computer guy” by profession. In recent years, as I’ve started to reach back into the astoundingly contemporary and explosive history of personal computers, I’ve begun to better understand his work. The ancient, cryptic language in which the Book of Mario was written shares a close root with the humming chatter of mainframes. My dad programmed tape storage and retrieval routines for the leviathanic cousins of our family’s Intellivision and our 386 DOS box.

I remember when he took me into the city to see what he did for a living. We each got on the train carrying a briefcase, but mine was cooler, because it had Hot Wheels. He brought me into the mainframe room, kept under keycard lock. I remember how cold it was, the hum of the machines, and the rows of magnetic tape rolls too big and heavy for me to lift. It was like something out of a distant speculative sci-fi future. I took for granted the similar level of technology I played games on back home. I was too young to make a connection between dad’s “toys” and mine.

Over 20 years later, I wondered about the physiology of the computer games I grew up playing. I wanted to think in bleep-bloop. I wanted to learn how Nintendo’s dream box dreamed.

I started studying 6502 binary (the parent of the NES processor). I picked a game to dissect, Dragonslayer IV, better known as Legacy of the Wizard in the US. The game was unfathomable to me as a kid, but it managed to draw me in despite its opacity. I had explored its dungeon for at least 30 hours as a child despite never reaching even the first boss! I poked around and read about similar experiences other players had with the game. “It was the hardest game I ever played! I spent hours exploring, but I never even made it to the first boss,” was the effect of what they wrote. What piqued my interest in the game again, was a tool-assisted speed-run on youtube in which it was beaten in under 15 minutes!

Watching the speed-run, the developers’ intent started to become clear. The (AWESOME!) music could be used for navigating the single gigantic, non-linear dungeon. Realizing this was like a kick in the head 20 years delayed. The game’s designers must have thought the trick was perfectly simple, and yet most of us apparently missed it. Something went fundamentally wrong. Yet, why did players continue to explore the dungeon for hours despite achieving no milestones? I wanted to understand, and I started to pick apart the game with a hex editor. I had an ambition that I might give something back to my past, that I might break down a game I had loved and build it back up from the floor.

The joy of being able to puppet the baddies’ brains was indescribable. For first the first time in my life, I was looking inside the head of mine pixelated nemesis, and poking its brain with sharp high-voltage electrodes. I can make you jump, I can make you run, I can turn you into a treasure chest, I can shoot you to the ceiling and fling you to the ground at terminal velocity, and you don’t even know why you’re doing it, you poor little block of sprites. I felt like a wizard, or a poltergeist pretending to be one.

I came back to the music as I prodded, but it seemed the most developed part of the game. I couldn’t make heads or tails of how the music engine ran. Yuzo Koshiro and Mieko Ishikawa worked on it. Koshiro-san was better known for Streets of Rage and Revenge of the Shinobi. Ishikawa-san worked on Popful Mail and Brandish 2 for Nihon Falcom as well. As I fiddled with the music engine, I started to realize the actual scope of the project I wanted to achieve. More so, I started to develop a very different kind of respect for the developers than I had as just a player. They had built enemy objects and a music engine that essentially performed “live” every time the game was turned on, practically from binary.

I was disheartened, but I was intrigued. I played around with the secret sound test mode; clicking on a portrait of your ancestor in the character selection screen allowed the player to cycle through 16 fantastic tracks. Cycling through the songs a few times, something compelled me to identify the track selection byte in RAM, and place a hexadecimal x10 in it.

There was a 17th track, unavailable to the in-game sound test. It was a different rendition of one of the standard 16, but eerie and wistful, with the heavy footfalls of a far-off dragon fading in gradually. I didn’t know what I was listening to at first. All of sudden, I realized that I might be the only person in the world who had ever heard that track besides Koshiro-san, Ishikawa-san, and the other members of the development team. It was a relic, hidden in the highest garret of the castle, left there for the team and for the curious gamer who came searching decades later. It was the Legacy of the Wizard.

Video game developers are craftspeople and artists, and their handiwork forms and strengthens the heart of a like-minded community. Developers seem to make games to say, “I was here; my vision remains.” Gamers recreate, tailor, and even sometimes break these visions to their own tastes. As a community, we get to look through each other’s eyes–video games are fundamentally empathic. We give our fantasies tangible form and place our friends at the focal point of our characters.

Video games may be the single most exciting of the modern media. Though the medium has entered the mainstream, the real value of these games is still underappreciated. They are ends, not diversions. We live to play. The games are also means, in that we play to learn. Occasionally, we even play just to blow up Nazi zombies, but what a powerful means and end that can be in itself!

Video games reflect the unique historical significance of my father’s and my generation, and the exciting and even frightening context into which the next generation is born.

Our games and the platforms they run on exhibit a very powerful and recent universal language. I’m not yet fluent in the language of the development team that left their beautiful little relic for a curious gamer to find so many years later, but if it might reach them, I would say, “Koshiro-san, Ishikawa-san, すみません, ありがとうございます。” Maybe this would better communicate my meaning:

(2A03:) 4C 2A 03

(It’s in a graphics nametable, but perhaps you could allow me artistic license.)

Roughly translated, it means “Forever NES.” The form of the game will exist forever. I realized that I couldn’t rewrite that game, that it wasn’t mine to change, but I came away loving it more than ever.

As I try to fathom the zeitgeist at the knee of the exponential growth curve, I gradually come to speak the language of my father. I begin to appreciate my grandfather’s work and the Altair he kept as a permanent fixture in his basement. I realize how video game artists have spoken to me in ways that not even books, canvas, film, or any other choice of medium can communicate.

We are at a turning point. We are here, getting the power-up. We make and play video games about saving the world to do it for real.


My Typical Flirtations in the “Meta-”
(Circa 2014 or before)

[Me:] Hey, I think you’re cute. Because of that, and because of the fact that I think you’ve indicated an openness to me, and because I’ve begrudgingly recognized the social norm that men generally make the first overt move in romance in our culture, I’m hitting on you in hopes that you share my essential neuroses. What I’m actually looking for in a partner is someone with a well-developed personal philosophy and a bleeding heart, but I’d like that with large breasts. You appear to have at least one of those, but I’m already suspicious of the other two and trying my hardest to walk a fine line between socially acceptable flirting and preserving my self-respect. By the way, I already feel like a prick for just thinking any of that.

[Girl:] Hi! I thought that maybe you were cute before you opened your mouth, but your intensity and atypicality is already putting me off. I’m used to being hit on by guys who rely on pick-up lines, conventional fashion, insincere sweet talk, and leveraging persisting backwards gender roles to their advantage.  Even if I am interested in you, there’s a good chance I’ll warm up to you only momentarily and then feign disinterest to encourage you to pursue. This is one of my ways of attempting to gain the upper hand.

[Me:] I probably won’t.  I’m put off by the sense that this has already become a slight power struggle. I honestly have baggage about the victor/prize dating mentality, which is either a result or cause of my standard “to find an equal and self-standing partner.”

[Girl:] That’s fine. I have every other barbarian in the age bracket, and you strike me as creepy and either too aggressive or not aggressive enough. Or both.

[Me:] As I try to put my baggage into check out of continual frustration and disappointment in dating, I’m starting to get comfortable talking with you, though. Despite the first impression I think I tend to make, I know not everything has to be intense. I’m actually having fun, however this works out, and I’d like to buy you a drink.

[Girl:] I’ll have something either “lite” or sugary and neon-colored.

[Me:] Wonderful. I just spit up a little in my mouth.

[Girl:] So did you like [blockbuster with horrible plotline and zero character development]?

[Me:] No, and the stuff of popular culture typically saddens and angers me,  but I can pretend like I’m eager to watch the movies you suggest. Have you ever seen [cult classic/independent film]?

[Girl:] No, and I’ll do less to hide the fact that your taste in movies seems pretentious. What do you listen to?

[Me:] Mostly the Mountain Goats.

[Girl:] Who’s that? They’re probably even more pretentious.  Have you ever heard of [someone I’ve heard on top 100 radio and hate]?

[Me:] I have, but I’ll lie and tell you I haven’t  heard enough of them to “really” form an opinion on them. I mostly listen to assorted punk and artists loosely grouped as “independent,” because they all get relatively little radio attention.

[Girl:] Why would anyone do that to her/himself?

[Me:] And some classic rock.

[Girl:] Oh, do you like [jam band]?!

[Me:] I do in theory, but the attempt to recapture the romance of the hippie generation in festivals that revolve more around drugs than their nominal commitments to music and social reform put me off the subculture. I’ll tell you “They’re alright,” though.

[Girl:] I just got back from [festival they were at]!

[Me:] Cool! At least you’re not going to judge my brand of substance-abuse. I would have hated it, but how was it?

[Girl:] Awesome! I  go more for the scene, by which I mean I actually go more for the drugs and sex. But I have to try to politely excuse myself now, because I’ve decided you’re less attractive than the next person I intend to flirt with. They have bigger muscles, two inches on your height, and I judge from the book’s cover that the conversation with them is likely to fall into more typical gender roles, which I find to be a more comfortable and empowering pretense.

[Me:] That’s a relief. I’m actually happy for you. It would sound incredibly snotty to make even a meta-remark about feminism in my head, but, well, I’ve already gone and done it. But I feel slightly guilty about my honest assessment of your personality, and I intend to rationalize to myself that I actually don’t know you well at all in case we ever talk again.

[Girl:] We probably won’t. I left 35 seconds ago, by the way.

[Me:] Thanks.


The Bigger Potato
Aug 19 2017

We have to keep breaking this down.

You say, “(S)he’s not a racist.” I say, “But (s)he takes systematic advantage over people of color.” You say again, “What do you mean? (S)he isn’t racist, though.”

Full stop. Take a deep breath. Let’s unpack this dialog, before we can’t have a dialog.

What I hear you mean is, “(S)he doesn’t believe in the categorical inferiority of other groups. Racism is an explicit philosophical belief, which (s)he doesn’t have. (S)he isn’t racist without this philosophical conviction.”

This an obvious form of racism, that reasonable people can agree is repugnant and wrong. We don’t have an explicit belief in the inferiority of another group of people. You’re missing something huge, gigantic, maybe the biggest part of racism. Right here, I’m not talking about the costume you wore at Halloween, or an insensitive thing you said, or a look you accidentally gave someone. For a moment, we’re just focusing on the other big potato, besides explicit philosophical conviction in the categorical lesser humanity of a group of human beings.

(S)he ran a political campaign, and attracted the support of some “genuine racists.” (S)he did not share their explicit beliefs. (S)he made no attempt to speak clearly and strongly against them, and discourage their vote, because (s)he benefited. Other people who also weren’t “genuine racists” liked other parts of what (s)he stood for, so held their noses and pulled the voting booth lever.

(S)he benefited directly from systematic advantage over people of color, hugely. (S)he gained great power, and made money. (S)he recognized inequality and privilege, and felt no moral imperative to correct it. (S)he pandered to her base, while a large fraction of it waved Nazi flags and donned white hoods. (S)he spoke to the other voters who couldn’t be “genuine racists,” because they didn’t hold an explicit philosophical belief in any group’s inferiority. (S)he reassured them, that they didn’t believe this, that they didn’t stand for it. Without holding this belief, without analyzing the reality to any sufficient degree, their actions, or lack, and their votes, made it clear that they put no priority on correcting systematic inequality, and that they actually didn’t value the lives of people of color. Full stop.

Tell me if these people were racist. Tell me if this is not the greater, uglier part of racism, by people who hold no explicit philosophical belief in the inferiority of another group of people. See if you can make your own peace with it, in private. If you feel something, acting with your conscience is better than shame.


Trump Versus Reality
Nov 13 2016

[The following is a work of fiction. It is an excerpt from a recorded dialog between president Barack Obama and president-elect Donald Trump behind closed doors in the Oval Office, as imagined by a student of physics. Without irony, the student believes it gives reason to hope for Donald’s leadership.]

[Sound of doors closing on the recording.]

B. O.: “Donald, let’s skip the pleasantries. I’m gonna say to you what I think any rational and decent person would say to you, in my position.”

D. T.: “What’s that?”

B. O.: “Don’t do it.”

D. T.: “You’ve gotta be kidding me. I’ve won, Barack.”

B. O.: “You’re right… You’ve won. You’ve won the contest, Donald. Now, you get to claim the prize. What’s that prize, Don? Do you have any idea?”

[About two seconds of silence]

B. O.: “Don, I have a hunch that you’re only looking to take the world for a ride as long as it benefits you. You have to understand the state of division this country is in, Don.”

D. T.: “It doesn’t matter! I’ve won, Hussein! The people love me, because I’m the real change! I can have anything I want.”

B. O.: “Don, Benito Mussolini ruled over a country for 26 years that descended into the bloodiest war in human history. He was caught attempting to flee to Spain, shot dead, and beaten and hung from his heels afterward. He had a might sight more political experience than you. I give it two years.”

D. T.: “You got a lot of gall! You got a lot of gall, Mr. First Black President of America, you damned puppet of your party–”

B. O.: “Don, what’s the current amount of the national deficit?”

D. T.: “Excuse me? I mean, it’s trillions, trillions–”

B. O.: “How many?”

D. T.: “Ten!”

B. O.: “It’s a hair under twenty, Don. Who’s the prime minister of Zimbabwe?”

D. T.: “What does it matter? Pick some irrelevant African country–”

B. O.: “He’s got nukes, Don! You don’t know this shit! Nobody knows this shit! I know fifteen college dropouts who could make ’em in their fucking basements, Don!”

D. T.: “What are you talking about?”

B. O.: “I hate to say that I didn’t expect you to know barely the first damned thing about nuclear physics! Don, universal proliferation is unavoidable! It’s already happened! I was serious about the college dropouts! Some of ’em even graduated, Don, with fucking doctorates! Where’s your doctorate from, Don? How many years you serve as governor? I couldn’t say this in front of the press, but it’s just you and me, pal, for an hour or so, so have a damned drink.”

[Sound of a bottle hitting the desk.]

D. T.: “I’ll have two.”

B. O.: “So will I!”

[Sounds of drinks being poured.]

B. O.: “Donald, you wanted the prize, but you didn’t want the responsibility that came along with it. None of us will survive without you, now, Don. You thought you could get away without the responsibility. None of us will survive unless you can perform the function, Don–not me, not you, and not a single person we love. It doesn’t work that way, anymore. We’re in the damned Atomic Age, now. We’ve only had the bomb for about 71 years. Our fathers are older than the bomb. Mugabe can get away with it, maybe, but we’re the presidents of the United States. You’re not getting out of this, Don. Now you gotta work to save your own skin. They hung Mussolini by his heels, but I give you two years. We clear? You’re bullshit’s not gonna work on me. We both know what you’re doing.”

D. T.: “What are the nuclear codes?”

B. O.: “Donald, let me take you through basics, first.”

[CLASSIFIED]

B. O.: “So, that’s where the light switches are.”

D. T.: “Oh my fucking God, oh my fucking God, I don’t know what I’m gonna do!”

B. O.: “It’s gonna be okay, Don. I bet you don’t know how the Electoral College works, either.”

D. T.: “What am I gonna do? Am I gonna die?”

B. O.: “Hopefully not, Don.”

D. T.: “I don’t know what I’m gonna do.”

B. O.: “You’re gonna do your best, Donald. Now, let’s go out and talk with the press.”

D. T.: “Wait, wait a minute. I can’t do that, yet. I need a minute.”

[About 4 seconds of silence]

B. O.: “Donald, you’re the president of the United States, now. You can’t show fear in the face of anything. You can’t let anything get under your skin, anymore.”

D. T.: “I need to think about what I tell the press, for a minute.”

B. O.: “Tell ’em we talked about the good and the bad. Tell ’em we talked about ways we have to protect them. Don’t let that beautiful face of yours crack. Most importantly, keep it to a minimum.”

D. T.: “Alright.”

[Sounds like face being gently slapped.]

D. T.: “Hopefully I didn’t ruin my makeup. Alright, I got it together again. We keep this short. Let’s go.”

B. O.: “Let’s.”

[End of recording]


Candlelight
2003

Once, there was a young boy who lived in an old house in an older city in an ancient world.  He lived with his mother and father, who loved him very much, and even though they and the old land had little to offer a lonely, young, shy child, he was happy.  There weren’t many friends to play with, or song to dance to, or games to play, as the aged have little use for such decadence, but there was a river the boy loved to swim in and lay by when the air was warm, with wildflowers on its banks that waved back and forth in the whispering breeze, and they were enough for the boy.  And in his timid ignorance, the boy found comfort.

One day, though, the boy became tired of being timid, and wanted to see if there was something beyond the old people and old buildings and lonely river he had kept to all his life.  He traveled to the farthest edges of the city, where the buildings were not quite so regal and the people were not quite so respectable, and he entered into the dimly-lit basement shop of a dirty, crippled mystic with a thin smile and tired eyes.  The mystic brought the boy slowly down rows of ancient tomes, past shelves of archaic instruments, and over piles of arcane oddities, but nothing caught the boy’s attention except a stubby, lopsided, brightly colored lump of wax that sat half-melted over the front counter of the shop.  With a weak, quiet laugh and a slow shake of his head, the mystic drew the shades, closed the lamps, and lit his strange little candle with as great a flourish as he could muster.

The boy watched the candle and was amazed; never before had he seen such a flame!  It writhed and morphed and danced atop the wick, becoming every strange shape, every exotic color the boy had never dreamed of in his musty bed back home or napping on the lonely riverside, and he was moved.

The boy turned to face the mystic, to ask the candle’s price, but stopped silent when he saw the man in the light of the candle.  His soiled robes shone brightly, his eyes smiled twice as widely as his mouth, and he appeared lost in dreamy, pensive thought.  Though the candle was not bright, the whole shop seemed illumed and polished in its radiance, and the small boy saw value in the heaping trinkets and understanding in the spines of the yellowed, rotting books.

After what seemed an eternity, the candle’s soundless, flickering dance slowed and the flame died; its eerie, beautiful light reflected in a warm, blue afterglow on the walls of the shop and in its keeper’s still smiling eyes.  He gave the boy the candle for his pocket change and a promise never to lose it.

The boy was overjoyed with his new toy.  He burned it by the riverside to watch the flowers grow large, and bright, and fragrant, and to see every friend and lover a lonely boy could never have reflected in the water’s surface.  He burned it in the quiet, dark hours in his room to watch his ambitions and hopes dance in the pristine warmth of the tiny flame.  But, most of all, the boy burned it alone, too conscious of his dreams burning in the candle to ever want to share it with anyone in that ancient world of old hearts and interred passions.  And with each burning, the candle grew taller and more elaborate, until even unlit it was a sight to behold, and just having it with him cast a foxfire innocence on the world.

Before long, keeping such a beautiful candle hidden proved too much for the boy to bear, as he spent more and more time burning it by the river and feeling more alone than ever.  He tried showing it to passers-by and visitors in the city, but they turned their backs to him and walked in their own shadows, determined not to see the light.  He tried showing it to those he knew in the city, but they simply laughed and smiled at a small child’s silly plaything.  He even tried to show it to his parents, but their age was made young in its light, and their passions revived, and they were sore-afraid of what the child’s light could do to them.  They demanded the candle, and when he would not give it, they sent him out of their home and into the dingy streets alone.

So the boy ran.  He charged through the streets with hot tears streaming back along his face and the candle held out as a torch before him, and in its light the manorly buildings were made to crumble, and the people’s fine clothing turned tattered and threadbare, and the townspeople chased him out screaming, wailing like frightened young children who had lost their favorite toy.

With no place left to go, the boy soon came back to the lonely riverside, still puffy-eyed and sniffling, still clutching his pretty little candle out in front of him.  And in the reflection of its sincere light on the water, he saw people just like him in far cities in young worlds, and never before had he wanted to be with someone else so much.  And so he ran with the river.  He ran through fields, into valleys, over hills, and always with the lonely river, for miles and miles, for years and years.

But too soon came a day when the boys legs were too tired to run, and his ears were dead to the ripple of the water, and his eyes dulled the colors of the flowers that lined the river’s banks.  Too weak to run, he walked, and then too weak to walk, he sat, and in his beaten loneliness brought forth a brightly colored stump of a candle from his pocket and lit it.  But the flame did not dance, and the flowers did not grow, and his heart was not moved.  The only things the candlelight stirred to motion were faint, familiar voices in the ancient ruins of an old city not far from the edge of the river.  And the boy cried and trembled, for the city that had run him out had drawn him in, and the river that had led him far had brought him nowhere.

He turned his back on the crumbling, empty ruins and looked once more to the water, where he saw himself reflected young and unfulfilled, sitting in the wildflowers on the riverbank in the warm summer sun.  With a weak toss, he sent the lit candle into the river, for it belonged to the bright, impassioned boy on the surface of the weed-choked stream, and not the tattered man with a tattered heart sitting there dying on its banks.
